90	DR	15376909	Historically, microarray image processing has been technically challenging in obtaining quality gene expression data. After hybridization of Cy3- and Cy5-labeled samples, images are collected and processed to obtain gene expression ratio measurements for each of the elements on the array. The hybridization process often brings in contaminating noise, which can make correct identification of the signal difficult. In addition, spot intensity levels are highly variable due to the expression differences of different genes, and weak spots are often difficult to detect. These conditions are further complicated by inherent irregularities in spot position, shape, and size commonly found on high-density microarrays, making image processing an often labor-intensive task that is difficult to reliably automate. We previously reported a novel third-dye array visualization (TDAV) technology that allows prehybridization visualization and quality control of printed arrays. Here, we present a new microarray image processing approach utilizing TDAV. By incorporating the third-dye image, we show that overall quality of the microarray data is significantly improved, and automation of processing is feasible and reliable. Furthermore, we demonstrate use of the third-dye image to better quality control microarray image analysis. Both the principle and implementation of the approach are presented in detail, with experimental results.
90	PR	15290769	Microarray analysis has become a widely used method for generating gene expression data on a genomic scale. Microarrays have been enthusiastically applied in many fields of biological research, even though several open questions remain about the analysis of such data. A wide range of approaches are available for computational analysis, but no general consensus exists as to standard for microarray data analysis protocol. Consequently, the choice of data analysis technique is a crucial element depending both on the data and on the goals of the experiment. Therefore, basic understanding of bioinformatics is required for optimal experimental design and meaningful interpretation of the results. This review summarizes some of the common themes in DNA microarray data analysis, including data normalization and detection of differential expression. Algorithms are demonstrated by analyzing cDNA microarray data from an experiment monitoring gene expression in T helper cells. Several computational biology strategies, along with their relative merits, are overviewed and potential areas for additional research discussed. The goal of the review is to provide a computational framework for applying and evaluating such bioinformatics strategies. Solid knowledge of microarray informatics contributes to the implementation of more efficient computational protocols for the given data obtained through microarray experiments.
90	NR	15239941	One of the critical limitations of current microarray technologies for use in expression analyses is the relatively large amount of input RNA required to generate labelled cDNA populations for array analysis. In situations where RNA is limiting, the options for expression profiling are to increase cDNA labelling and hybridisation efficiency, or to use an amplification strategy to generate enough RNA/cDNA for use with a standard labelling method. Sample amplification approaches must preserve the representation of the relative abundances of the different RNAs within the starting population and must also be highly reproducible. This review evaluates current signal and sample amplification technologies, including those that can be used to generate labelled cDNA populations for array analysis from as little as a single cell.
90	NR	15239939	NA
90	PR	15130795	The user-friendly MicroPreP framework was developed to transform raw intensity data from cDNA microarrays into high-quality data. The main features of this software are: LOWESS normalisation; merging of DNA microarray data from changing slide versions; outlier detection; and slide quality assessment.
90	PR	15130793	Acquisition of microarray data is prone to systematic errors. A correction, called normalisation, must be applied to the data before further analysis is performed. With many normalisation techniques published and in use, the best way of executing this correction remains an open question. In this study, a variety of single-slide normalisation techniques, and different parameter settings for these techniques, were compared over many replicated microarray experiments. Different normalisation techniques were assessed through the distribution of the standard deviation of replicates from one biological sample across different slides. It is shown that local normalisation outperformed global normalisation, and intensity-based 'LOWESS' outperformed trimmed mean and median normalisation techniques. Overall, the top performing normalisation technique was a print-tip-based LOWESS with zero robust iterations. Lastly, we validated this evaluation methodology by examining the ability to predict oestrogen receptor-positive and -negative breast cancer samples with data that had been normalised using different techniques.
90	NR	15130791	A potential limitation of data from microarray experiments exists when improper control samples are used. In cancer research, comparisons of tumour expression profiles to those from normal samples is challenging due to tissue heterogeneity (mixed cell populations). A specific example exists in a published colon cancer dataset, in which tissue heterogeneity was reported among the normal samples. In this paper, we show how to overcome or avoid the problem of using normal samples that do not derive from the same tissue of origin as the tumour. We advocate an exploratory unsupervised bootstrap analysis that can reveal unexpected and undesired, but strongly supported, clusters of samples that reflect tissue differences instead of tumour versus normal differences. All of the algorithms used in the analysis, including the maximum difference subset algorithm, unsupervised bootstrap analysis, pooled variance t-test for finding differentially expressed genes and the jackknife to reduce false positives, are incorporated into our online Gene Expression Data Analyzer ( http:// bioinformatics.upmc.edu/GE2/GEDA.html ).
90	PR	15130790	NA
90	DR	14708120	Gene expression microarrays are a relatively new technology, dating back just a few years, yet they have already become a very widely used tool in biology, and have evolved to a wide range of applications well beyond their original design intent. However, while the use of microarrays has expanded, and the issues of performance optimization have been intensively studied, the fundamental issue of data integrity management has largely been ignored. Now that performance has improved so greatly, the shortcomings of data integrity control methods constitute a greater percent of the stumbling blocks for investigators. Microarray data are cumbersome, and the rule up to this point has mostly been one of hands-on transformations, leading to human errors which often have dramatic consequences. We show in this review that the time lost on such mistakes is enormous and dramatically affects results; therefore, mistakes should be mitigated in any way possible. We outline the scope of the data integrity issue, to survey some of the most common and dangerous data transformations, and their shortcomings. To illustrate, we review some case studies. We then look at the work done by the research community on this issue (which admittedly is meager up to this point). Some data integrity issues are always going to be difficult, while others will become easier-one of our goals is to expedite the use of integrity control methods. Finally, we present some preliminary guidelines and some specific approaches that we believe should be the focus of future research. Copyright 2003 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
90	DR	14679077	We have created an immunology-related microarray chip containing primarily known genes with well-studied functional properties. By looking at known genes rather than expressed sequence tags, we hope to gain a better understanding of immunological pathways and how they work. The immunology gene chip contains genes from the following functional categories: T cell genes; B cell genes; dendritic cell genes; chemokine and cytokine genes; apoptosis genes; cell cycle genes; cell interaction genes; general hematology and immunology genes; and adhesion genes. We have also developed a novel three-color cDNA array platform in which arrays are directly visualized before hybridization, which allows us to select only high-quality chips for our experiments. In an effort to provide quantitative quality control for each array element as well as the entire chip, we have developed Matarray, a software package for image processing and data acquisition. With Matarray, we have built a quantitative data filtering and normalization scheme that has proved to be more efficient than the existing methods. The list of immunology chip genes is available from the authors.
90	NR	14632079	A data anomaly was observed that affected the uniformity and reproducibility of fluorescent signal across DNA microarrays. Results from experimental sets designed to identify potential causes (from microarray production to array scanning) indicated that the anomaly was linked to a batch process; further work allowed us to localize the effect to the posthybridization array stringency washes. Ozone levels were monitored and highly correlated with the batch effect. Controlled exposures of microarrays to ozone confirmed this factor as the root cause, and we present data that show susceptibility of a class of cyanine dyes (e.g., Cy5, Alexa 647) to ozone levels as low as 5-10 ppb for periods as short as 10-30 s. Other cyanine dyes (e.g., Cy3, Alexa 555) were not significantly affected until higher ozone levels (> 100 ppb). To address this environmental effect, laboratory ozone levels should be kept below 2 ppb (e.g., with filters in HVAC) to achieve high quality microarray data.
90	NR	14594714	MOTIVATION: Gene expression profile analyses have been used in numerous studies covering a broad range of areas in biology. When unreliable measurements are excluded, missing values are introduced in gene expression profiles. Although existing multivariate analysis methods have difficulty with the treatment of missing values, this problem has received little attention. There are many options for dealing with missing values, each of which reaches drastically different results. Ignoring missing values is the simplest method and is frequently applied. This approach, however, has its flaws. In this article, we propose an estimation method for missing values, which is based on Bayesian principal component analysis (BPCA). Although the methodology that a probabilistic model and latent variables are estimated simultaneously within the framework of Bayes inference is not new in principle, actual BPCA implementation that makes it possible to estimate arbitrary missing variables is new in terms of statistical methodology. RESULTS: When applied to DNA microarray data from various experimental conditions, the BPCA method exhibited markedly better estimation ability than other recently proposed methods, such as singular value decomposition and K-nearest neighbors. While the estimation performance of existing methods depends on model parameters whose determination is difficult, our BPCA method is free from this difficulty. Accordingly, the BPCA method provides accurate and convenient estimation for missing values. AVAILABILITY: The software is available at http://hawaii.aist-nara.ac.jp/~shige-o/tools/.
90	DR	14594707	MOTIVATION: High-throughput microarray technologies enable measurements of the expression levels of thousands of genes in parallel. However, microarray printing, hybridization and washing may create substantial variability in the quality of the data. As erroneous measurements may have a drastic impact on the results by disturbing the normalization schemes and by introducing expression patterns that lead to incorrect conclusions, it is crucial to discard low quality observations in the early phases of a microarray experiment. A typical microarray experiment consists of tens of thousands of spots on a microarray, making manual extraction of poor quality spots impossible. Thus, there is a need for a reliable and general microarray spot quality control strategy. RESULTS: We suggest a novel strategy for spot quality control by using Bayesian networks, which contain many appealing properties in the spot quality control context. We illustrate how a non-linear least squares based Gaussian fitting procedure can be used in order to extract features for a spot on a microarray. The features we used in this study are: spot intensity, size of the spot, roundness of the spot, alignment error, background intensity, background noise, and bleeding. We conclude that Bayesian networks are a reliable and useful model for microarray spot quality assessment. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: http://sigwww.cs.tut.fi/TICSP/SpotQuality/.
90	PR	14583113	DNA microarray data are affected by variations from a number of sources. Before these data can be used to infer biological information, the extent of these variations must be assessed. Here we describe an open source software package, lcDNA, that provides tools for filtering, normalizing, and assessing the statistical significance of cDNA microarray data. The program employs a hierarchical Bayesian model and Markov Chain Monte Carlo simulation to estimate gene-specific confidence intervals for each gene in a cDNA microarray data set. This program is designed to perform these primary analytical operations on data from two-channel spotted, or in situ synthesized, DNA microarrays.
90	NR	14579749	While several studies have reported methods to optimize expression microarray protocols, none have dealt directly with hybridization wash stringency. We designed a series of experiments to determine the optimal stringency conditions for microarray experiments, using reproducibility and magnitudes of log2 (test/reference) ratio values as measures of quality. Low-stringency wash conditions of cell line hybridizations led to nonspecific binding, resulting in increased intensities, decreased magnitude of ratios, and poor reproducibility. Relatively high-stringency wash conditions were found to give the best reproducibility and large magnitude ratio changes, although increasing the stringency beyond this point led to lower magnitude ratios and poorer reproducibility. The expression levels of the ERBB2 oncogene in the BT474 versus MCF7 cell lines showed that high-stringency wash conditions gave the best agreement with real-time quantitative PCR, although the magnitude of the changes by microarray was smaller than for real-time quantitative PCR. Analysis of a series of cell lines washed at the optimized stringency indicated that the rank order of relative expression levels for ERBB2 microarray clones agreed well with the rank order of ERBB2 levels, as measured by quantitative PCR. These results indicate that the optimization of stringency conditions will improve microarray reproducibility and give more representative expression values.
90	NR	14570984	Often changes in gene expression levels have been considered significant only when above/below some arbitrarily chosen threshold. We investigated the effect of applying a purely statistical approach to microarray analysis and demonstrated that small changes in gene expression have biological significance. Whole genome microarray analysis of a pde2Delta mutant, constructed in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae reference strain FY23, revealed altered expression of approximately 11% of protein encoding genes. The mutant, characterized by constitutive activation of the Ras/cAMP pathway, has increased sensitivity to stress, reduced ability to assimilate nonfermentable carbon sources, and some cell wall integrity defects. Applying the Munich Information Centre for Protein Sequences (MIPS) functional categories revealed increased expression of genes related to ribosome biogenesis and downregulation of genes in the cell rescue, defense, cell death and aging category, suggesting a decreased response to stress conditions. A reduced level of gene expression in the unfolded protein response pathway (UPR) was observed. Cell wall genes whose expression was affected by this mutation were also identified. Several of the cAMP-responsive orphan genes, upon further investigation, revealed cell wall functions; others had previously unidentified phenotypes assigned to them. This investigation provides a statistical global transcriptome analysis of the cellular response to constitutive activation of the Ras/cAMP pathway.
90	PR	14512358	We describe two sets of programs for expediting routine tasks in analysis of cDNA microarray data and promoter sequences. The first set permits bad data points to be flagged with respect to a number of parameters and performs normalization in three different ways. It allows combining of result files into comprehensive data sets, evaluation of the quality of both technical and biological replicates and row and/or column standardization of data matrices. The second set supports mapping ESTs in the genome, identifying the corresponding genes and recovering their promoters, analyzing promoters for transcription factor binding sites, and visual representation of the results. The programs are designed primarily for Arabidopsis thaliana researchers, but can be adapted readily for other model systems. Availability and Supplementary information: http://www.personal.psu.edu/nhs109/Programs/
90	PR	14512352	MOTIVATION: Theoretical considerations suggest that current microarray screening algorithms may fail to detect many true differences in gene expression (Type II analytic errors). We assessed 'false negative' error rates in differential expression analyses by conventional linear statistical models (e.g. t-test), microarray-adapted variants (e.g. SAM, Cyber-T), and a novel strategy based on hold-out cross-validation. The latter approach employs the machine-learning algorithm Patient Rule Induction Method (PRIM) to infer minimum thresholds for reliable change in gene expression from Boolean conjunctions of fold-induction and raw fluorescence measurements. RESULTS: Monte Carlo analyses based on four empirical data sets show that conventional statistical models and their microarray-adapted variants overlook more than 50% of genes showing significant up-regulation. Conjoint PRIM prediction rules recover approximately twice as many differentially expressed transcripts while maintaining strong control over false-positive (Type I) errors. As a result, experimental replication rates increase and total analytic error rates decline. RT-PCR studies confirm that gene inductions detected by PRIM but overlooked by other methods represent true changes in mRNA levels. PRIM-based conjoint inference rules thus represent an improved strategy for high-sensitivity screening of DNA microarrays. AVAILABILITY: Freestanding JAVA application at http://microarray.crump.ucla.edu/focus
90	NR	12968112	Fetal neural stem cells (NSCs) have received great attention not only for their roles in normal development but also for their potential use in the treatment of neurodegenerative disorders. To develop a robust method of assessing the state of stem cells, we have designed, tested, and validated a rodent NSC array. This array consists of 260 genes that include cell type-specific markers for embryonic stem (ES) cells and neural progenitor cells as well as growth factors, cell cycle-related genes, and extracellular matrix molecules known to regulate NSC biology. The 500-bp polymerase chain reaction products amplified and validated by using gene-specific primers were arrayed along with positive controls. Blanks were included for quality control, and some genes were arrayed in duplicate. No cross-hybridization was detected. The quality of the arrays and their sensitivity were also examined by using probes prepared by conventional reverse transcriptase or by using amplified probes prepared by linear polymerase replication (LPR). Both methods showed good reproducibility, and probes prepared by LPR labeling appeared to detect expression of a larger proportion of expressed genes. Expression detected by either method could be verified by RT-PCR with high reproducibility. Using these stem cell chips, we have profiled liver, ES, and neural cells. The cell types could be readily distinguished from each other. Nine markers specific to mouse ES cells and 17 markers found in neural cells were verified as robust markers of the stem cell state. Thus, this focused neural stem array provides a convenient and useful tool for detection and assessment of NSCs and progenitor cells and can reliably distinguish them from other cell populations.
90	NR	12967957	MOTIVATION: We examine the effect of replication on the detection of apparently differentially expressed genes in gene expression microarray experiments. Our analysis is based on a random sampling approach using real data sets from 16 published studies. We consider both the ability to find genes that meet particular statistical criteria as well as the stability of the results in the face of changing levels of replication. RESULTS: While dependent on the data source, our findings suggest that stable results are typically not obtained until at least five biological replicates have been used. Conversely, for most studies, 10-15 replicates yield results that are quite stable, and there is less improvement in stability as the number of replicates is further increased. Our methods will be of use in evaluating existing data sets and in helping to design new studies.
90	DR	12967349	BACKGROUND: The availability of high throughput methods for measurement of mRNA concentrations makes the reliability of conclusions drawn from the data and global quality control of samples and hybridization important issues. We address these issues by an information theoretic approach, applied to discretized expression values in replicated gene expression data. RESULTS: Our approach yields a quantitative measure of two important parameter classes: First, the probability P(sigma|S) that a gene is in the biological state sigma in a certain variety, given its observed expression S in the samples of that variety. Second, sample specific error probabilities which serve as consistency indicators of the measured samples of each variety. The method and its limitations are tested on gene expression data for developing murine B-cells and a t-test is used as reference. On a set of known genes it performs better than the t-test despite the crude discretization into only two expression levels. The consistency indicators, i.e. the error probabilities, correlate well with variations in the biological material and thus prove efficient. CONCLUSIONS: The proposed method is effective in determining differential gene expression and sample reliability in replicated microarray data. Already at two discrete expression levels in each sample, it gives a good explanation of the data and is comparable to standard techniques.
90	DR	12962547	BACKGROUND: Genomic studies of complex tissues pose unique analytical challenges for assessment of data quality, performance of statistical methods used for data extraction, and detection of differentially expressed genes. Ideally, to assess the accuracy of gene expression analysis methods, one needs a set of genes which are known to be differentially expressed in the samples and which can be used as a "gold standard". We introduce the idea of using sex-chromosome genes as an alternative to spiked-in control genes or simulations for assessment of microarray data and analysis methods. RESULTS: Expression of sex-chromosome genes were used as true internal biological controls to compare alternate probe-level data extraction algorithms (Microarray Suite 5.0 [MAS5.0], Model Based Expression Index [MBEI] and Robust Multi-array Average [RMA]), to assess microarray data quality and to establish some statistical guidelines for analyzing large-scale gene expression. These approaches were implemented on a large new dataset of human brain samples. RMA-generated gene expression values were markedly less variable and more reliable than MAS5.0 and MBEI-derived values. A statistical technique controlling the false discovery rate was applied to adjust for multiple testing, as an alternative to the Bonferroni method, and showed no evidence of false negative results. Fourteen probesets, representing nine Y- and two X-chromosome linked genes, displayed significant sex differences in brain prefrontal cortex gene expression. CONCLUSION: In this study, we have demonstrated the use of sex genes as true biological internal controls for genomic analysis of complex tissues, and suggested analytical guidelines for testing alternate oligonucleotide microarray data extraction protocols and for adjusting multiple statistical analysis of differentially expressed genes. Our results also provided evidence for sex differences in gene expression in the brain prefrontal cortex, supporting the notion of a putative direct role of sex-chromosome genes in differentiation and maintenance of sexual dimorphism of the central nervous system. Importantly, these analytical approaches are applicable to all microarray studies that include male and female human or animal subjects.
90	PR	12930160	INTRODUCTION: Oligonucleotide and cDNA microarray experiments are now common practice in biological science research. The goal of these experiments is generally to gain clues about the functions of genes by measuring how their expression levels rise and fall in response to changing experimental conditions. Measures of gene expression are affected, however, by a variety of factors. This paper introduces statistical methods to assess the variability of Affymetrix GeneChip data due to randomness. METHODS: The variation of Affymetrix's GeneChip signal data are quantified at both chip level and individual gene level, respectively, by the agreement study method and variance components method. Three agreement measurement methods are introduced to assess the variability among chips. Variation sources for gene expression data are decomposed into four categories: systematic experiment variation, treatment effect, biological variation, and chip variation. The focus of this paper is on evaluating and comparing the last two kinds of variations. RESULTS: Measurement of agreement and variance components methods were applied to an experimental data, and the calculation and interpretation were exemplified. The variability between biological samples were shown to exist and were assessed at both the chip level and individual gene level. Using the variance components method, it was found that the biological and chip variation are roughly comparable. The Statistical Analysis System (SAS) program for doing the agreement studies can be obtained from the correspondence author.
90	DR	12906732	Microarray experiments can generate enormous amounts of data, but large datasets are usually inherently complex, and the relevant information they contain can be difficult to extract. For the practicing biologist, we provide an overview of what we believe to be the most important issues that need to be addressed when dealing with microarray data. In a microarray experiment we are simply trying to identify which genes are the most "interesting" in terms of our experimental question, and these will usually be those that are either overexpressed or underexpressed (upregulated or downregulated) under the experimental conditions. Analysis of the data to find these genes involves first preprocessing of the raw data for quality control, including filtering of the data (e.g., detection of outlying values) followed by standardization of the data (i.e., making the data uniformly comparable throughout the dataset). This is followed by the formal quantitative analysis of the data, which will involve either statistical hypothesis testing or multivariate pattern recognition. Statistical hypothesis testing is the usual approach to "class comparison," where several experimental groups are being directly compared. The best approach to this problem is to use analysis of variance, although issues related to multiple hypothesis testing and probability estimation still need to be evaluated. Pattern recognition can involve "class prediction," for which a range of supervised multivariate techniques are available, or "class discovery," for which an even broader range of unsupervised multivariate techniques have been developed. Each technique has its own limitations, which need to be kept in mind when making a choice from among them. To put these ideas in context, we provide a detailed examination of two specific examples of the analysis of microarray data, both from parasitology, covering many of the most important points raised.
90	NR	12890740	Several "high throughput methods" have been introduced into research and routine laboratories during the past decade. Providing a new approach to the analysis of genomic alterations and RNA or protein expression patterns, these new techniques generate a plethora of new data in a relatively short time, and promise to deliver clues to the diagnosis and treatment of human cancer. Along with these revolutionary developments, new tools for the interpretation of these large sets of data became necessary and are now widely available. Tissue microarray (TMA) technology is one of these new tools. It is based on the idea of applying miniaturisation and a high throughput approach to the analysis of intact tissues. The potential and the scientific value of TMAs in modern research have been demonstrated in a logarithmically increasing number of studies. The spectrum for additional applications is widening rapidly, and comprises quality control in histotechnology, longterm tissue banking, and the continuing education of pathologists. This review covers the basic technical aspects of TMA production and discusses the current and potential future applications of TMA technology.
90	PR	12874046	MOTIVATION: A crucial step in microarray data analysis is the selection of subsets of interesting genes from the initial set of genes. In many cases, especially when comparing a specific condition to a reference, the genes of interest are those which are differentially expressed. Two common methods for gene selection are: (a) selection by fold difference (at least n fold variation) and (b) selection by altered ratio (at least n standard deviations away from the mean ratio). RESULTS: The novel method proposed here is based on ANOVA and uses replicate spots to estimate an empirical distribution of the noise. The measured intensity range is divided in a number of intervals. A noise distribution is constructed for each such interval. Bootstrapping is used to map the desired confidence levels from the noise distribution corresponding to a given interval to the measured log ratios in that interval. If the method is applied on individual arrays having replicate spots, the method can calculate an overall width of the noise distribution which can be used as an indicator of the array quality. We compared this method with the fold change and unusual ratio method. We also discuss the relationship with an ANOVA model proposed by Churchill et al. In silico experiments were performed while controlling the degree of regulation as well as the amount of noise. Such experiments show the performance of the classical methods can be very unsatisfactory. We also compared the results of the 2-fold method with the results of the noise sampling method using pre and post immortalization cell lines derived from the MDAH041 fibroblasts hybridized on Affymetrix GeneChip arrays. The 2-fold method reported 198 genes as upregulated and 493 genes as downregulated. The noise sampling method reported 98 gene upregulated and 240 genes downregulated at the 99.99% confidence level. The methods agreed on 221 genes downregulated and 66 genes upregulated. Fourteen genes from the subset of genes reported by both methods were all confirmed by Q-RT-PCR. Alternative assays on various subsets of genes on which the two methods disagreed suggested that the noise sampling method is likely to provide fewer false positives.
90	DR	12874045	Data preprocessing including proper normalization and adequate quality control before complex data mining is crucial for studies using the cDNA microarray technology. We have developed a simple procedure that integrates data filtering and normalization with quantitative quality control of microarray experiments. Previously we have shown that data variability in a microarray experiment can be very well captured by a quality score q(com) that is defined for every spot, and the ratio distribution depends on q(com). Utilizing this knowledge, our data-filtering scheme allows the investigator to decide on the filtering stringency according to desired data variability, and our normalization procedure corrects the q(com)-dependent dye biases in terms of both the location and the spread of the ratio distribution. In addition, we propose a statistical model for false positive rate determination based on the design and the quality of a microarray experiment. The model predicts that a lower limit of 0.5 for the replicate concordance rate is needed in order to be certain of true positives. Our work demonstrates the importance and advantages of having a quantitative quality control scheme for microarrays.
90	PR	12874043	MOTIVATION: The focus of this paper is on two new normalization methods for cDNA microarrays. After the image analysis has been performed on a microarray and before differentially expressed genes can be detected, some form of normalization must be applied to the microarrays. Normalization removes biases towards one or other of the fluorescent dyes used to label each mRNA sample allowing for proper evaluation of differential gene expression. RESULTS: The two normalization methods that we present here build on previously described non-linear normalization techniques. We extend these techniques by firstly introducing a normalization method that deals with smooth spatial trends in intensity across microarrays, an important issue that must be dealt with. Secondly we deal with normalization of a new type of cDNA microarray experiment that is coming into prevalence, the small scale specialty or 'boutique' array, where large proportions of the genes on the microarrays are expected to be highly differentially expressed. AVAILABILITY: The normalization methods described in this paper are available via http://www.pi.csiro.au/gena/ in a software suite called tRMA: tools for R Microarray Analysis upon request of the authors. Images and data used in this paper are also available via the same link.
90	NR	12866417	Hundreds of tissue samples may be assembled in a tissue microarray format for simultaneous immunostaining assessment of protein expression profiling. A DNA microarray two-color laser scanner was used for automated analysis of tissue microarray indirect immunofluorescence. On sections from both a human lung adenocarcinoma and a squamous cell carcinoma tissue microarray, fluorescence intensity for two epidermal growth factor receptors (EGFR and c-erbB2) correlates with diagnostic pathologic assessment, indicating that immunohistochemistry quantitation can be achieved. Importantly, double-label indirect immunofluorescence detection with the cDNA scanner demonstrates that one reference antigen can normalize tumor marker immunosignal for the cellular content of tissue microarray tissue cores. Therefore, DNA microarray scanners and associated image analysis software provide general and efficient analysis of tissue microarray immunostaining, including estimation of specific protein expression levels.
90	PR	12866403	NA
90	NR	12835267	MOTIVATION: The occurrence of false positives and false negatives in a microarray analysis could be easily estimated if the distribution of p-values were approximated and then expressed as a mixture of null and alternative densities. Essentially any distribution of p-values can be expressed as such a mixture by extracting a uniform density from it. RESULTS: The occurrence of false positives and false negatives in a microarray analysis could be easily estimated if the distribution of p-values were approximated and then expressed as a mixture of null and alternative densities. Essentially any distribution of p-values can be expressed as such a mixture by extracting a uniform density from it. AVAILABILITY: An S-plus function library is available from http://www.stjuderesearch.org/statistics.
90	NR	12824526	Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (QPCR) using the Roche LightCycler was used to verify the expression of asparagine synthetase (ASNS) identified by microarray analysis as a target of p53 transrepression and mutant p53 transactivation. A p53-null cell line derived from lung carcinoma, H1299, was infected with recombinant adenovirus expressing wild-type (WT) p53, mutant p53-D281G, or beta-galactosidase as a control. After 24 h of infection, RNA was harvested and used for microarray analysis. ASNS was one of several genes whose expression was down-regulated by WT p53 and up-regulated in the presence of mutant p53. Expression levels of ASNS were measured relative to an exogenously applied quality-control nucleic acid template. Real-time PCR product accumulation was monitored using the intercalating dye, SYBR Green I, which exhibits a higher fluorescence upon binding of double-stranded DNA. Relative gene expression was calculated using conditions at the early stages of PCR, when amplification was logarithmic and, thus, could be correlated to initial copy number of gene transcripts. ASNS was found to be down-regulated in the presence of WT p53 and up-regulated by mutant p53.
90	NR	12824348	DNA microarrays are widely used in biological research; by analyzing differential hybridization on a single microarray slide, one can detect changes in mRNA expression levels, increases in DNA copy numbers and the location of transcription factor binding sites on a genomic scale. Having performed the experiments, the major challenge is to process large, noisy datasets in order to identify the specific array elements that are significantly differentially hybridized. This normally requires aggregating different, often incompatible programs into a multi-step pipeline. Here we present ExpressYourself, a fully integrated platform for processing microarray data. In completely automated fashion, it will correct the background array signal, normalize the Cy5 and Cy3 signals, score levels of differential hybridization, combine the results of replicate experiments, filter problematic regions of the array and assess the quality of individual and replicate experiments. ExpressYourself is designed with a highly modular architecture so various types of microarray analysis algorithms can readily be incorporated as they are developed; for example, the system currently implements several normalization methods, including those that simultaneously consider signal intensity and slide location. The processed data are presented using a web-based graphical interface to facilitate comparison with the original images of the array slides. In particular, Express Yourself is able to regenerate images of the original microarray after applying various steps of processing, which greatly facilities identification of position-specific artifacts. The program is freely available for use at http://bioinfo.mbb.yale.edu/expressyourself.
90	DR	12801869	MOTIVATION: The microarray technology is increasingly being applied in biological and medical research to address a wide range of problems such as the classification of tumors. An important statistical question associated with tumor classification is the identification of new tumor classes using gene expression profiles. Essential aspects of this clustering problem include identifying accurate partitions of the tumor samples into clusters and assessing the confidence of cluster assignments for individual samples. RESULTS: Two new resampling methods, inspired from bagging in prediction, are proposed to improve and assess the accuracy of a given clustering procedure. In these ensemble methods, a partitioning clustering procedure is applied to bootstrap learning sets and the resulting multiple partitions are combined by voting or the creation of a new dissimilarity matrix. As in prediction, the motivation behind bagging is to reduce variability in the partitioning results via averaging. The performances of the new and existing methods were compared using simulated data and gene expression data from two recently published cancer microarray studies. The bagged clustering procedures were in general at least as accurate and often substantially more accurate than a single application of the partitioning clustering procedure. A valuable by-product of bagged clustering are the cluster votes which can be used to assess the confidence of cluster assignments for individual observations. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: For supplementary information on datasets, analyses, and software, consult http://www.stat.berkeley.edu/~sandrine and http://www.bioconductor.org.
90	PR	12801864	MOTIVATION: An important goal in analyzing microarray data is to determine which genes are differentially expressed across two kinds of tissue samples or samples obtained under two experimental conditions. Various parametric tests, such as the two-sample t-test, have been used, but their possibly too strong parametric assumptions or large sample justifications may not hold in practice. As alternatives, a class of three nonparametric statistical methods, including the empirical Bayes method of Efron et al. (2001), the significance analysis of microarray (SAM) method of Tusher et al. (2001) and the mixture model method (MMM) of Pan et al. (2001), have been proposed. All the three methods depend on constructing a test statistic and a so-called null statistic such that the null statistic's distribution can be used to approximate the null distribution of the test statistic. However, relatively little effort has been directed toward assessment of the performance or the underlying assumptions of the methods in constructing such test and null statistics. RESULTS: We point out a problem of a current method to construct the test and null statistics, which may lead to largely inflated Type I errors (i.e. false positives). We also propose two modifications that overcome the problem. In the context of MMM, the improved performance of the modified methods is demonstrated using simulated data. In addition, our numerical results also provide evidence to support the utility and effectiveness of MMM.
90	DR	12771224	Construction methodologies for cDNA microarrays lack the ability to determine array integrity prior to hybridization, leaving the array itself a source of uncontrolled experimental variation. We solved this problem through development of a three-color cDNA array platform whereby printed probes are tagged with fluorescein and are compatible with Cy3 and Cy5 target labeling dyes when using confocal laser scanners possessing narrow bandwidths. Here we use this approach to: (i) develop a tracking system to monitor the printing of probe plates at predicted coordinates; (ii) define the quantity of immobilized probe necessary for quality hybridized array data to establish pre-hybridization array selection criteria; (iii) investigate factors that influence probe availability for hybridization; and (iv) explore the feasibility of hybridized data filtering using element fluorescein intensity. A direct and significant relationship (R2 = 0.73, P < 0.001) between pre-hybridization average fluorescein intensity and subsequent hybridized replicate consistency was observed, illustrating that data quality can be improved by selecting arrays that meet defined pre-hybridization criteria. Furthermore, we demonstrate that our three-color approach provides a means to filter spots possessing insufficient bound probe from hybridized data sets to further improve data quality. Collectively, this strategy will improve microarray data and increase its utility as a sensitive screening tool.
90	NR	12761060	MOTIVATION: Clustering analysis of data from DNA microarray hybridization studies is essential for identifying biologically relevant groups of genes. Partitional clustering methods such as K-means or self-organizing maps assign each gene to a single cluster. However, these methods do not provide information about the influence of a given gene for the overall shape of clusters. Here we apply a fuzzy partitioning method, Fuzzy C-means (FCM), to attribute cluster membership values to genes. RESULTS: A major problem in applying the FCM method for clustering microarray data is the choice of the fuzziness parameter m. We show that the commonly used value m = 2 is not appropriate for some data sets, and that optimal values for m vary widely from one data set to another. We propose an empirical method, based on the distribution of distances between genes in a given data set, to determine an adequate value for m. By setting threshold levels for the membership values, genes which are tigthly associated to a given cluster can be selected. Using a yeast cell cycle data set as an example, we show that this selection increases the overall biological significance of the genes within the cluster. AVAILABILITY: Supplementary text and Matlab functions are available at http://www-igbmc.u-strasbg.fr/fcm/
90	PR	12761058	MOTIVATION: There is a very large and growing level of effort toward improving the platforms, experiment designs, and data analysis methods for microarray expression profiling. Along with a growing richness in the approaches there is a growing confusion among most scientists as to how to make objective comparisons and choices between them for different applications. There is a need for a standard framework for the microarray community to compare and improve analytical and statistical methods. RESULTS: We report on a microarray data set comprising 204 in-situ synthesized oligonucleotide arrays, each hybridized with two-color cDNA samples derived from 20 different human tissues and cell lines. Design of the approximately 24 000 60mer oligonucleotides that report approximately 2500 known genes on the arrays, and design of the hybridization experiments, were carried out in a way that supports the performance assessment of alternative data processing approaches and of alternative experiment and array designs. We also propose standard figures of merit for success in detecting individual differential expression changes or expression levels, and for detecting similarities and differences in expression patterns across genes and experiments. We expect this data set and the proposed figures of merit will provide a standard framework for much of the microarray community to compare and improve many analytical and statistical methods relevant to microarray data analysis, including image processing, normalization, error modeling, combining of multiple reporters per gene, use of replicate experiments, and sample referencing schemes in measurements based on expression change. AVAILABILITY/SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Expression data and supplementary information are available at http://www.rii.com/publications/2003/HE_SDS.htm
90	NR	12761056	MOTIVATION: A major problem of pattern classification is estimation of the Bayes error when only small samples are available. One way to estimate the Bayes error is to design a classifier based on some classification rule applied to sample data, estimate the error of the designed classifier, and then use this estimate as an estimate of the Bayes error. Relative to the Bayes error, the expected error of the designed classifier is biased high, and this bias can be severe with small samples. RESULTS: This paper provides a correction for the bias by subtracting a term derived from the representation of the estimation error. It does so for Boolean classifiers, these being defined on binary features. Although the general theory applies to any Boolean classifier, a model is introduced to reduce the number of parameters. A key point is that the expected correction is conservative. Properties of the corrected estimate are studied via simulation. The correction applies to binary predictors because they are mathematically identical to Boolean classifiers. In this context the correction is adapted to the coefficient of determination, which has been used to measure nonlinear multivariate relations between genes and design genetic regulatory networks. An application using gene-expression data from a microarray experiment is provided on the website http://gspsnap.tamu.edu/smallsample/ (user:'smallsample', password:'smallsample)').
90	NR	12748210	The massive increase in information on the human DNA sequence and the development of new technologies will have a profound impact on the diagnosis and treatment of cardiovascular diseases. The microarray is a micro-hybridisation based assay. The filter, called microchip or chip, is a special kind of membrane in which are spotted several thousands of oligonucleotides of cDNA fragments coding for known genes or expressed sequence tags. The resulting hybridisation signal on the chip is analysed by a fluorescent scanner and processed with a software package utilising the information on the oligonucleotide or cDNA map of the chip to generate a list of relative gene expression. Microarray technology can be used for many different purposes, most prominently to measure differential gene expression, variations in gene sequence (by analysing the genome of mutant phenotypes), or more recently, the entire binding site for transcription factors. Measurements of gene expression have the advantage of providing all available sequence information for any given experimental design and data interpretation in pursuit of biological understanding. This research tool will contribute to radically changing our understanding of cardiovascular diseases.
90	PR	12724292	MOTIVATION: Data from one-channel cDNA microarray studies may exhibit poor reproducibility due to spatial heterogeneity, non-linear array-to-array variation and problems in correcting for background. Uncorrected, these phenomena can give rise to misleading conclusions. RESULTS: Spatial heterogeneity may be corrected using two-dimensional loess smoothing (Colantuoni et al., 2002). Non-linear between-array variation may be corrected using an iterative application of one-dimensional loess smoothing. A method for background correction using a smoothing function rather than simple subtraction is described. These techniques promote within-array spatial uniformity and between-array reproducibility. Their application is illustrated using data from a study of the effects of an insulin sensitizer, rosiglitazone, on gene expression in white adipose tissue in diabetic db/db mice. They may also be useful with data from two-channel cDNA microarrays and from oligonucleotide arrays. AVAILABILITY: R functions for the methods described are available on request from the author.
90	NR	12724291	MOTIVATION: The success of each method of cluster analysis depends on how well its underlying model describes the patterns of expression. Outlier-resistant and distribution-insensitive clustering of genes are robust against violations of model assumptions. RESULTS: A measure of dissimilarity that combines advantages of the Euclidean distance and the correlation coefficient is introduced. The measure can be made robust using a rank order correlation coefficient. A robust graphical method of summarizing the results of cluster analysis and a biological method of determining the number of clusters are also presented. These methods are applied to a public data set, showing that rank-based methods perform better than log-based methods. AVAILABILITY: Software is available from http://www.davidbickel.com.
90	NR	12724289	MOTIVATION: In cDNA microarray experiments all samples are labelled with either Cy3 dye or Cy5 dye. Certain genes exhibit dye bias-a tendency to bind more efficiently to one of the dyes. The common reference design avoids the problem of dye bias by running all arrays 'forward', so that the samples being compared are always labelled with the same dye. But comparison of samples labelled with different dyes is sometimes of interest. In these situations, it is necessary to run some arrays 'reverse'-with the dye labelling reversed-in order to correct for the dye bias. The design of these experiments will impact one's ability to identify genes that are differentially expressed in different tissues or conditions. We address the design issue of how many specimens are needed, how many forward and reverse labelled arrays to perform, and how to optimally assign Cy3 and Cy5 labels to the specimens. RESULTS: We consider three types of experiments for which some reverse labelling is needed: paired samples, samples from two predefined groups, and reference design data when comparison with the reference is of interest. We present simple probability models for the data, derive optimal estimators for relative gene expression, and compare the efficiency of the estimators for a range of designs. In each case, we present the optimal design and sample size formulas. We show that reverse labelling of individual arrays is generally not required.
90	PR	12710676	NA
90	PR	12710670	NA
90	PR	12664687	NA
90	NR	12664686	Microarrays are at the center of a revolution in biotechnology, allowing researchers to screen tens of thousands of genes simultaneously. Typically, they have been used in exploratory research to help formulate hypotheses. In most cases, this phase is followed by a more focused, hypothesis-driven stage in which certain specific biological processes and pathways are thought to be involved. Since a single biological process can still involve hundreds of genes, microarrays are still the preferred approach as proven by the availability of focused arrays from several manufacturers. Because focused arrays from different manufacturers use different sets of genes, each array will represent any given regulatory pathway to a different extent. We argue that a functional analysis of the arrays available should be the most important criterion used in the array selection. We developed Onto-Compare as a database that can provide this functionality, based on the Gene Ontology Consortium nomenclature. We used this tool to compare several arrays focused on apoptosis, oncogenes, and tumor suppressors. We considered arrays from BD Biosciences Clontech, PerkinElmer, Sigma-Genosys, and SuperArray. We showed that among the oncogene arrays, the PerkinElmer MICROMAX oncogene microarray has a better representation of oncogenesis, protein phosphorylation, and negative control of cell proliferation. The comparison of the apoptosis arrays showed that most apoptosis-related biological processes are equally well represented on the arrays considered. However, functional categories such as immune response, cell-cell signaling, cell-surface receptor linked signal transduction, and interleukins are better represented on the Sigma-Genoys Panorama human apoptosis array. At the same time, processes such as cell cycle control, oncogenesis, and negative control of cell proliferation are better represented on the BD Biosciences Clontech Atlas Select human apoptosis array.
90	PR	12664680	NA
90	NR	12652786	NA
90	NR	12634797	Success in proteomics depends upon careful study design and high-quality biological samples. Advanced information technologies, and also an ability to use existing knowledge to the full, will be crucial in making sense of the data. Despite its genome-scale potential, proteome analysis is at a much earlier stage of development than genomics and gene expression (microarray) studies. Fundamental issues involving biological variability, pre-analytic factors and analytical reproducibility remain to be resolved. Consequently, the analysis of proteomics data is currently informal and relies heavily on expert opinion. Databases and software tools developed for the analysis of molecular sequences and microarrays are helpful, but are limited owing to the unique attributes of proteomics data and differing research goals.
90	NR	12613263	DNA microarrays have become an established tool for gene expression profiling. Construction of these microarrays using immobilized cDNAs is a common experimental strategy. However, this is extremely laborious, requiring the preparation of hundreds or thousands of cDNA probes. To minimize this initial bottleneck, we developed a comprehensive high-throughput robotic system to prepare DNA probes suitable for microarray analysis with minimal user intervention. We describe an automated system using the MultiPROBE Nucleic Acid Purification Workstation to provide the liquid handling and other functions needed to optimize this process. We were able to carry out fully automated plasmid cDNA isolation, PCR assay setup, and PCR purification and also to direct the characterization and tracking of DNA probes during processing. Protocols began with the initial preparation of a plasmid DNA archive of bacterial stocks in parallel 96-well plates (192 samples/run) and continued through to the dilution and reformatting of chip-ready DNA probes in 384-well format. These and other probe production procedures and additional instrument systems were used to process fully a set of mouse cDNA clones that were then validated by differential gene expression analysis.
90	NR	12613262	The biological materials available for cDNA microarray studies are often limiting. Thus, protocols have been developed to amplify RNAs isolated from limited amounts of tissues or cells. RNA amplification by in vitro transcription is the most widely used among the available amplification protocols. Two means of generating a dsDNA template for the RNA polymerase are a combination of reverse transcription with conventional second-strand cDNA synthesis and a combination of the switch mechanism at the 5' end of RNA templates (SMART) with reverse transcription, followed by PCR. To date, there has been no systematic comparison of the efficiency of the two amplification strategies. In this study, we performed and analyzed a set of six microarray experiments involving the use of a "regular" (unamplified) microarray experimental protocol and two different RNA amplification protocols. Based on their ability to identify differentially expressed genes and assuming that the results from the regular protocol are correct, our analyses demonstrated that both amplification protocols achieved reproducible and reliable results. From the same amount of starting material, our results also indicated that more amplified RNA can be obtained using conventional second-strand cDNA synthesis than from the combination of SMART and PCR. When the critical issue is the amount of starting RNA, we recommend the conventional second-strand cDNA synthesis as the preferred amplification method.
90	NR	12613261	Recently, we described a technique that allows us to prepare probes for expression profiling from 0.5-1 microgram RNA without template or signal amplification. However, we were unable to use this method to study cells harvested by needle biopsy, cell sorting, or laser capture microdissection. Here we give a new protocol for amplifying RNA with multiple reaction cycles and preparing fluorescent probes from approximately 10 cells. We use random 9-mers with a T3 RNA polymerase recognition sequence on the 5' end for every round of cDNA synthesis except the first. The latter is primed with oligo(dT) with a T7 RNA polymerase recognition sequence on the 5' end. Results were highly reproducible and reliable, and the products generated using our method seemed comparable to those produced using the RiboAmp RNA kit when both were used to do two cycles of amplification. To test our method's utility, we lysed cells directly into reverse transcription buffer containing RNase inhibitor and performed three rounds of RNA amplification. The expression profiles of mouse C2 and NIH 3T3 cells obtained with 11,232-element arrays using amplified RNAs were similar to those seen when probes were prepared from unamplified templates.
90	NR	12538251	SUMMARY: QuickLIMS is a Microsoft Access-based laboratory information and management system, capable of processing all information for microarray production. The program's operational flow is protocol-based, dynamically adapting to changes of the process. It interacts with the laboratory robot and with other database systems over the network, and it represents a complete solution for the management of the entire manufacturing process. AVAILABILITY AND SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: http://www.dkfz-heidelberg.de/kompl_genome/Other/QuickLims/index.html
90	DR	12538239	MOTIVATION: DNA and protein microarrays have become an established leading-edge technology for large-scale analysis of gene and protein content and activity. Contact-printed microarrays has emerged as a relatively simple and cost effective method of choice but its reliability is especially susceptible to quality of pixel information obtained from digital scans of spotted features in the microarray image. RESULTS: We address the statistical computation requirements for optimizing data acquisition and processing of digital scans. We consider the use of median filters to reduce noise levels in images and top-hat filters to correct for trends in background values. We also consider, as alternative estimators of spot intensity, discs of fixed radius, proportions of histograms and k-means clustering, either with or without a square-root intensity transformation and background subtraction. We identify, using combinatoric procedures, optimal filter and estimator parameters, in achieving consistency among the replicates of a gene on each microarray. Our results, using test data from microarrays of HCMV, indicate that a highly effective approach for improving reliability and quality of microarray data is to apply a 21 by 21 top-hat filter, then estimate spot intensity as the mean of the largest 20% of pixel values in the target region, after a square-root transformation, and corrected for background, by subtracting the mean of the smallest 70% of pixel values. AVAILABILITY: Fortran90 subroutines implementing these methods are available from the authors, or at http://www.bioss.ac.uk/~chris.
90	NR	12519957	TRANSPATH is a database system about gene regulatory networks that combines encyclopedic information on signal transduction with tools for visualization and analysis. The integration with TRANSFAC, a database about transcription factors and their DNA binding sites, provides the possibility to obtain complete signaling pathways from ligand to target genes and their products, which may themselves be involved in regulatory action. As of July 2002, the TRANSPATH Professional release 3.2 contains about 9800 molecules, >1800 genes and >11 400 reactions collected from approximately 5000 references. With the ArrayAnalyzer, an integrated tool has been developed for evaluation of microarray data. It uses the TRANSPATH data set to identify key regulators in pathways connected with up- or down-regulated genes of the respective array. The key molecules and their surrounding networks can be viewed with the PathwayBuilder, a tool that offers four different modes of visualization. More information on TRANSPATH is available at http://www.biobase.de/pages/products/databases.html.
90	PR	12519956	The Stanford Microarray Database (SMD; http://genome-www.stanford.edu/microarray/) serves as a microarray research database for Stanford investigators and their collaborators. In addition, SMD functions as a resource for the entire scientific community, by making freely available all of its source code and providing full public access to data published by SMD users, along with many tools to explore and analyze those data. SMD currently provides public access to data from 3500 microarrays, including data from 85 publications, and this total is increasing rapidly. In this article, we describe some of SMD's newer tools for accessing public data, assessing data quality and for data analysis.
90	NR	12499293	MOTIVATION: Microarray experiments are inherently noisy. Replication is the key to estimating realistic fold-changes despite such noise. In the analysis of the various sources of noise the dependency structure of the replication needs to be taken into account. RESULTS: We analyzed replicate data sets from a Mycobacterium tuberculosis trcS mutant in order to identify differentially expressed genes and suggest new methods for filtering and normalizing raw array data and for imputing missing values. Mixed ANOVA models are applied to quantify the various sources of error. Such analysis also allows us to determine the optimal number of samples and arrays. Significance values for differential expression are obtained by a hierarchical bootstrapping scheme on scaled residuals. Four highly upregulated genes, including bfrB, were analyzed further. We observed an artefact, where transcriptional readthrough from these genes led to apparent upregulation of adjacent genes. AVAILABILITY: All methods and data discussed are available in the package YASMAhttp://www.cryst.bbk.ac.uk/wernisch/yasma.html for the statistical data analysis system R (http://www.R-project.org).
90	NR	12499292	MOTIVATION: Microarray data has been shown recently to be efficacious in distinguishing closely related cell types that often appear in different forms of cancer, but is not yet practical clinically. However, the data might be used to construct a minimal set of marker genes that could then be used clinically by making antibody assays to diagnose a specific type of cancer. Here a replication algorithm is used for this purpose. It evolves an ensemble of predictors, all using different combinations of genes to generate a set of optimal predictors. RESULTS: We apply this method to the leukemia data of the Whitehead/MIT group that attempts to differentially diagnose two kinds of leukemia, and also to data of Khan et al. to distinguish four different kinds of childhood cancers. In the latter case we were able to reduce the number of genes needed from 96 to less than 15, while at the same time being able to classify all of their test data perfectly. We also apply this method to two other cases, Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma data (Shipp et al., 2002), and data of Ramaswamy et al. on multiclass diagnosis of 14 common tumor types. AVAILABILITY: http://stravinsky.ucsc.edu/josh/gesses/.
90	NR	12490445	MOTIVATION: We present statistical methods for determining the number of per gene replicate spots required in microarray experiments. The purpose of these methods is to obtain an estimate of the sampling variability present in microarray data, and to determine the number of replicate spots required to achieve a high probability of detecting a significant fold change in gene expression, while maintaining a low error rate. Our approach is based on data from control microarrays, and involves the use of standard statistical estimation techniques. RESULTS: After analyzing two experimental data sets containing control array data, we were able to determine the statistical power available for the detection of significant differential expression given differing levels of replication. The inclusion of replicate spots on microarrays not only allows more accurate estimation of the variability present in an experiment, but more importantly increases the probability of detecting genes undergoing significant fold changes in expression, while substantially decreasing the probability of observing fold changes due to chance rather than true differential expression.
90	NR	12490444	MOTIVATION: Most supervised classification methods are limited by the requirement for more cases than variables. In microarray data the number of variables (genes) far exceeds the number of cases (arrays), and thus filtering and pre-selection of genes is required. We describe the application of Between Group Analysis (BGA) to the analysis of microarray data. A feature of BGA is that it can be used when the number of variables (genes) exceeds the number of cases (arrays). BGA is based on carrying out an ordination of groups of samples, using a standard method such as Correspondence Analysis (COA), rather than an ordination of the individual microarray samples. As such, it can be viewed as a method of carrying out COA with grouped data. RESULTS: We illustrate the power of the method using two cancer data sets. In both cases, we can quickly and accurately classify test samples from any number of specified a priori groups and identify the genes which characterize these groups. We obtained very high rates of correct classification, as determined by jack-knife or validation experiments with training and test sets. The results are comparable to those from other methods in terms of accuracy but the power and flexibility of BGA make it an especially attractive method for the analysis of microarray cancer data.
90	NR	12481020	There has been considerable variability in the reported results of immunohistochemical staining for some diagnostically relevant antigens. Our objectives in this study were to (1) use a multitumor tissue microarray with tissue from 351 cases received in our department, representing 16 normal tissues and 47 different tumor types, to compare immunohistochemical staining results in our laboratory with published data, using a panel of 22 antibodies; (2) assess interlaboratory variability of immunohistochemical staining for S-100 using this microarray; and (3) test the ability of hierarchical clustering analysis to group tumors by primary site, based on their immunostaining profile. Tissue microarrays consisting of duplicate 0.6-mm cores from blocks identified in the hospital archives were constructed and stained according to our usual protocols. Antibodies directed against the following antigens were used: B72.3, bcl-2, carcinoembryonic antigen, c-kit, pankeratin, CD 68, CD 99, CK 5/6, CK 7, CK 8/18, CK19, CK 20, CK 22, epithelial membrane antigen, estrogen receptor, melan-A, p53, placental alkaline phosphatase, S-100, synaptophysin, thyroid transcription factor-1, and vimentin. Staining results on the array cases were compared with published results, and hierarchical clustering analysis was performed based on the immunohistochemical staining results. Unstained slides of the multitumor tissue microarray were sent to five other diagnostic immunohistochemistry laboratories and stained for S-100 protein. The staining results from the different laboratories were compared. Staining results using our current methods and samples from our laboratory were compatible with those described in the literature for most antigens. Placental alkaline phosphatase staining was not specific with our protocol, showing staining of a broad spectrum of different tumors; this finding initiated a review of our recent requests for placental alkaline phosphatase immunostaining and revealed two instances in which placental alkaline phosphatase positivity was incorrectly interpreted as evidence of a germ cell tumor. S-100 staining was less sensitive but more specific for the diagnosis of melanoma or neural tumor in our laboratory, compared to some published reports. Assessment of interlaboratory variability of S-100 immunostaining showed that there was more frequent staining of carcinomas in some laboratories, resulting in decreased specificity of S-100 staining in distinguishing melanoma from carcinoma. Hierarchical clustering analysis showed a strong trend for tumors to cluster by tissue of origin, but there were significant exceptions. We conclude that multiple-tumor microarrays are an efficient method for assessing the sensitivity and specificity of staining with any antibody used diagnostically. As a tool for quality assurance, they offer the advantage of taking into account local differences in tissue fixation, processing, and staining. They also allow cost-effective assessment of interlaboratory variability in immunohistochemical staining. Results of hierarchical clustering analysis show the potential for panels of immunohistochemical stains to identify the primary site of metastatic carcinomas but also confirm the limitations of currently available antibodies in giving unequivocal tissue-specific staining patterns.
90	PR	12454646	Measurement of gene-expression profiles using microarray technology is becoming increasingly popular among the biomedical research community. Although there has been great progress in this field, investigators are still confronted with a difficult question after completing their experiments: how to validate the large data sets that are generated? This review summarizes current approaches to verifying global expression results, discusses the caveats that must be considered, and describes some methods that are being developed to address outstanding problems.
90	NR	12454642	Microarray technology has undergone a rapid evolution. With widespread interest in large-scale genomic research, an abundance of equipment and reagents have now become available and affordable to a large cross section of the scientific community. As protocols become more refined, careful investigators are able to obtain good quality microarray data quickly. In most recent times, however, perhaps one of the biggest obstacles researchers face is not the manufacture and use of microarrays at the bench, but storage and analysis of the array data. This review discusses the most recent equipment, reagents and protocols available to the researcher, as well as describing data analysis and storage options available from the evolving field of microarray informatics.
90	NR	12454641	The potential medical applications of microarrays have generated much excitement, and some skepticism, within the biomedical community. Some researchers have suggested that within the decade microarrays will be routinely used in the selection, assessment, and quality control of the best drugs for pharmaceutical development, as well as for disease diagnosis and for monitoring desired and adverse outcomes of therapeutic interventions. Realizing this potential will be a challenge for the whole scientific community, as breakthroughs that show great promise at the bench often fail to meet the requirements of clinicians and regulatory scientists. The development of a cooperative framework among regulators, product sponsors, and technology experts will be essential for realizing the revolutionary promise that microarrays hold for drug development, regulatory science, medical practice and public health.
90	NR	12454640	A single microarray can provide information on the expression of tens of thousands of genes. The amount of information generated by a microarray-based experiment is sufficiently large that no single study can be expected to mine each nugget of scientific information. As a consequence, the scale and complexity of microarray experiments require that computer software programs do much of the data processing, storage, visualization, analysis and transfer. The adoption of common standards and ontologies for the management and sharing of microarray data is essential and will provide immediate benefit to the research community.
90	NR	12437328	Metabonomic analysis of biofluids and tissues utilizing high-resolution NMR spectroscopy and chemometric techniques has proven valuable in characterizing the biochemical response to toxicity for many xenobiotics. To assess the analytical reproducibility of metabonomic protocols, sample preparation and NMR data acquisition were performed at two sites (one using a 500 MHz and the other using a 600 MHz system) using two identical (split) sets of urine samples from an 8-day acute study of hydrazine toxicity in the rat. Despite the difference in spectrometer operating frequency, both datasets were extremely similar when analyzed using principal components analysis (PCA) and gave near-identical descriptions of the metabolic responses to hydrazine treatment. The main consistent difference between the datasets was related to the efficiency of water resonance suppression in the spectra. In a 4-PC model of both datasets combined, describing all systematic dose- and time-related variation (88% of the total variation), differences between the two datasets accounted for only 3% of the total modeled variance compared to ca. 15% for normal physiological (pre-dose) variation. Furthermore, <3% of spectra displayed distinct inter-site differences, and these were clearly identified as outliers in their respective dose-group PCA models. No samples produced clear outliers in both datasets, suggesting that the outliers observed did not reflect an unusual sample composition, but rather sporadic differences in sample preparation leading to, for example, very dilute samples. Estimations of the relative concentrations of citrate, hippurate, and taurine were in >95% correlation (r(2)) between sites, with an analytical error comparable to normal physiological variation in concentration (4-8%). The excellent analytical reproducibility and robustness of metabonomic techniques demonstrated here are highly competitive compared to the best proteomic analyses and are in significant contrast to genomic microarray platforms, both of which are complementary techniques for predictive and mechanistic toxicology. These results have implications for the quantitative interpretation of metabonomic data, and the establishment of quality control criteria for both regulatory agencies and for integrating data obtained at different sites.
90	NR	12428786	NA
90	NR	12424117	MOTIVATION: Recent technological advances such as cDNA microarray technology have made it possible to simultaneously interrogate thousands of genes in a biological specimen. A cDNA microarray experiment produces a gene expression 'profile'. Often interest lies in discovering novel subgroupings, or 'clusters', of specimens based on their profiles, for example identification of new tumor taxonomies. Cluster analysis techniques such as hierarchical clustering and self-organizing maps have frequently been used for investigating structure in microarray data. However, clustering algorithms always detect clusters, even on random data, and it is easy to misinterpret the results without some objective measure of the reproducibility of the clusters. RESULTS: We present statistical methods for testing for overall clustering of gene expression profiles, and we define easily interpretable measures of cluster-specific reproducibility that facilitate understanding of the clustering structure. We apply these methods to elucidate structure in cDNA microarray gene expression profiles obtained on melanoma tumors and on prostate specimens.
90	NR	12424114	MOTIVATION: Two-color microarray experiments in which an aliquot derived from a common RNA sample is placed on each array are called reference designs. Traditionally, microarray experiments have used reference designs, but designs without a reference have recently been proposed as alternatives. RESULTS: We develop a statistical model that distinguishes the different levels of variation typically present in cancer data, including biological variation among RNA samples, experimental error and variation attributable to phenotype. Within the context of this model, we examine the reference design and two designs which do not use a reference, the balanced block design and the loop design, focusing particularly on efficiency of estimates and the performance of cluster analysis. We calculate the relative efficiency of designs when there are a fixed number of arrays available, and when there are a fixed number of samples available. Monte Carlo simulation is used to compare the designs when the objective is class discovery based on cluster analysis of the samples. The number of discrepancies between the estimated clusters and the true clusters were significantly smaller for the reference design than for the loop design. The efficiency of the reference design relative to the loop and block designs depends on the relation between inter- and intra-sample variance. These results suggest that if cluster analysis is a major goal of the experiment, then a reference design is preferable. If identification of differentially expressed genes is the main concern, then design selection may involve a consideration of several factors.
90	NR	12424113	MOTIVATION: DNA microarray is a powerful high-throughput tool for studying gene function and regulatory networks. Due to the problem of potential cross hybridization, using full-length genes for microarray construction is not appropriate in some situations. A bioinformatic tool, PRIMEGENS, has recently been developed for the automatic design of PCR primers using DNA fragments that are specific to individual open reading frames (ORFs). RESULTS: PRIMEGENS first carries out a BLAST search for each target ORF against all other ORFs of the genome to quickly identify possible homologous sequences. Then it performs optimal sequence alignment between the target ORF and each of its homologous ORFs using dynamic programming. PRIMEGENS uses the sequence alignments to select gene- specific fragments, and then feeds the fragments to the Primer3 program to design primer pairs for PCR amplification. PRIMEGENS can be run from the command line on Unix/Linux platforms as a stand-alone package or it can be used from a Web interface. The program runs efficiently, and it takes a few seconds per sequence on a typical workstation. PCR primers specific to individual ORFs from Shewanella oneidensis MR-1 and Deinococcus radiodurans R1 have been designed. The PCR amplification results indicate that this method is very efficient and reliable for designing specific probes for microarray analysis.
90	NR	12409475	Comparisons of expression levels across different cDNA microarray experiments are easier when a common reference is co-hybridized to every microarray. Often this reference consists of one experimental control sample, a pool of cell lines or a mix of all samples to be analyzed. We have developed an alternative common reference consisting of a mix of the products that are spotted on the array. Pooling part of the cDNA PCR products before they are printed and their subsequent amplification towards either sense or antisense cRNA provides an excellent common reference. Our results show that this reference yields a reproducible hybridization signal in 99.5% of the cDNA probes spotted on the array. Accordingly, a ratio can be calculated for every spot, and expression levels across different hybridizations can be compared. In dye-swap experiments this reference shows no significant ratio differences, with 95% of the spots within an interval of +/-0.2-fold change. The described method can be used in hybridizations with both amplified and non-amplified targets, is time saving and provides a constant batch of common reference that lasts for thousands of hybridizations.
90	NR	12363367	We demonstrate the accurate picoliter-scale dispensing of active proteins using a novel laser transfer technique. Droplets of protein solution are dispensed onto functionalized glass slides and into plastic microwells, activating as small as 50-microm diameter areas on these surfaces. Protein microarrays fabricated by laser transfer were assayed using standard fluorescent labeling techniques to demonstrate successful protein and antigen binding. These results indicate that laser transfer does not damage the active site of the dispensed protein and that this technique can be used to successfully fabricate a functioning protein microarray. Also, as a result of the efficient nature of the process, material usage is reduced by two to four orders of magnitude compared to conventional pin dispensing methods for protein spotting.
90	DR	12359098	To establish a method to evaluate the quality of the printed microarray and DNA fragments' immobilization. The target gene fragments that were made with the restriction display PCR (RD-PCR) technique were printed on a superamine modified glass slide, then immobilized with UV cross-linking and heat. This chip was hybridized with universal primers that were labeled with cy3-dUTP, as well as cDNA that was labeled with cy3-dCTP, as the conventional protocol. Most of the target gene fragments on the chip showed positive signals, but the negative control showed no signal, and vice versa. We established a method that enables an effective evaluation of the quality of the microarrays.
90	NR	12350348	The Jeryl Lynn strain of mumps vaccine live (MVL) was developed in 1966 by Merck Co. and has been widely used in the U.S. and other countries since the early 1970s. Partial sequencing has recently shown that the vaccine contains a mixture of two substrains with substantially different nucleotide sequences. We have determined the complete genomic sequences of both substrains and identified 414 nucleotide differences (2.69%), leading to 87 amino acid substitutions (1.67%). We used this information to develop methods for quantification of the substrain components in vaccine samples based on PCR and restriction enzyme cleavage and oligonucleotide microarray hybridization and monitored their dynamics in viral populations propagated in different conditions. Passaging Jeryl Lynn strain in Vero or CEF cell cultures resulted in rapid selection of the major component JL1, while growth in embryonated chicken eggs (ECE) favored accumulation of the minor component JL2. Based on the findings presented here, it is proposed that the substrain composition of Jeryl Lynn vaccine can be monitored as a part of its quality control to ensure consistency of the vaccine.
90	NR	12243651	BACKGROUND: PCR amplification of bacterial 16S rRNA genes provides the most comprehensive and flexible means of sampling bacterial communities. Sequence analysis of these cloned fragments can provide a qualitative and quantitative insight of the microbial population under scrutiny although this approach is not suited to large-scale screenings. Other methods, such as denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis, heteroduplex or terminal restriction fragment analysis are rapid and therefore amenable to field-scale experiments. A very recent addition to these analytical tools is represented by microarray technology. RESULTS: Here we present our results using a Universal DNA Microarray approach as an analytical tool for bacterial discrimination. The proposed procedure is based on the properties of the DNA ligation reaction and requires the design of two probes specific for each target sequence. One oligo carries a fluorescent label and the other a unique sequence (cZipCode or complementary ZipCode) which identifies a ligation product. Ligated fragments, obtained in presence of a proper template (a PCR amplified fragment of the 16s rRNA gene) contain either the fluorescent label or the unique sequence and therefore are addressed to the location on the microarray where the ZipCode sequence has been spotted. Such an array is therefore "Universal" being unrelated to a specific molecular analysis. Here we present the design of probes specific for some groups of bacteria and their application to bacterial diagnostics. CONCLUSIONS: The combined use of selective probes, ligation reaction and the Universal Array approach yielded an analytical procedure with a good power of discrimination among bacteria.
90	NR	12238767	The application of microarray analysis to gene expression from limited tissue samples has not been very successful because of the poor signal qualityfrom the genes expressed at low levels. Here we discussed the use of catalyzed reporter deposition (CARD) technology to amplify signals from limited RNA samples on nylon membrane cDNA microarray. When the input RNA level was greater than 10 microg, the genes expressed at high levels did not amplify in proportion to those expressed at low levels. Compared to conventional colorimetric detection, the CARD method requires less than 10% of the total RNA used for amplification of signal displayed onto a nylon membrane cDNA microarray. Total RNA (5-10 microg), as one can extract from a limited amount of specimen, was determined to produce a linear correlation between the colorimetric detection and CARD methods. Beyond this range, it can cause a nonlinear amplification of highly expressed and low-abundance genes. These results suggest that when amplification is needed for any applications using the CARD method, including DNA microarray experiments, precaution has to be taken in the amount of RNA used to avoid skew amplification and thus misleading conclusions.
90	NR	12227734	Management and analysis of the huge amounts of data produced by microarray experiments is becoming one of the major bottlenecks in the utilization of this high-throughput technology. We describe the basic design of a microarray gene expression database to help microarray users and their informatics teams to set up their information services. We describe two data models--a simpler one called ArrayExpressB and the complete model ArrayExpressC, and discuss some implementation issues. For latest developments see http: wwwebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress
90	NR	12186648	BACKGROUND: Parasitic helminths of the genus Schistosoma mate, achieve sexual maturity and produce eggs in the bloodstream of their definitive hosts, and the most important pathological consequences of the infection are associated with this process. We have used cDNA microarray technology to initiate genome-wide gene-expression studies of sex and sexual development in mature Schistosoma mansoni parasites. RESULTS: An S. mansoni-specific cDNA microarray was fabricated using 576 expressed sequence tags selected from three cDNA libraries and originating from two different parasite developmental stages. Five independent cDNA microarray hybridizations were analyzed using stringent filtering criteria and careful quality control, leading to the identification of 12 new female-associated and 4 new male-associated gene transcripts in the mature adult schistosome. Statistical analysis of variation demonstrated high levels of agreement within a cDNA microarray (correlation coefficient 0.91; median coefficient of variation 11.1%) and between cDNA microarrays (correlation coefficient 0.90; median coefficient of variation 14.4%). RT-PCR analysis confirmed the cDNA microarray results, thereby supporting the reliability of the system. CONCLUSIONS: Our study expands the list of S. mansoni gender-associated gene transcripts from all previous studies by a factor of two. Among the new associations identified, a tyrosinase ortholog was preferentially expressed in the adult female, and a dynein light-chain ortholog was highly induced in the adult male. cDNA microarrays offer the potential for exponential leaps in the understanding of parasite biology and this study shows how molecules involved in sexual biology can be rapidly identified.
90	NR	12180093	Although DNA microarray technology has been used successfully to analyze global gene expression in pure cultures, it has not been rigorously tested and evaluated within the context of complex environmental samples. Adapting microarray hybridization for use in environmental studies faces several challenges associated with specificity, sensitivity and quantitation.
90	DR	12176840	MArray is a Matlab toolbox with a graphical user interface that allows the user to analyse single or paired microarray datasets by direct input of the raw data output file from image analysis packages, such as QuantArray or GenePiX. The application provides simple procedures to manually evaluate the quality of each measurement, multiple approaches to both ratio normalization (simple normalization, intensity dependent normalization) and evaluation of the reproducibility of paired experiments (using the techniques 'simple statistical method' and 'quality control ellipse' and 'significance analysis of microarrays'). Specifically, interactive spot evaluation functions are available in MArray and an online gene information database (NCBI UniGene) is linked. The application may provide a valuable aid in selecting and optimizing experimental procedures, as well as serving as an analytical tool for two-state biological comparisons, such as a study of single-dose activation. It is entirely platform independent, and only requires Matlab installed. AVAILABILITY: http://matrise.uio.no/marray/marray.html
90	NR	12176828	MOTIVATION: The increasing use of DNA microarrays to probe cell physiology requires methods for visualizing different expression phenotypes and explicitly connecting individual genes to discriminating expression features. Such methods should be robust and maintain biological interpretability. RESULTS: We propose a method for the mapping of the physiological state of cells and tissues from multidimensional expression data such as those obtained with DNA microarrays. The method uses Fisher discriminant analysis to create a linear projection of gene expression measurements that maximizes the separation of different sample classes. Relative to other typical classification methods, this method provides insights into the discriminating characteristics of expression measurements in terms of the contribution of individual genes to the definition of distinct physiological states. This projection method also facilitates visualization of classification results in a reduced dimensional space. Examples from four different cases demonstrate the ability of the method to produce well-separated groups in the projection space and to identify important genes for defining physiological states. The method can be augmented to also include data from the proteomic and metabolic phenotypes and can be useful in disease diagnosis, drug screening and bioprocessing applications.
90	NR	12172558	Analysis of transcript representation on gene microarrays requires microgram amounts of total RNA or DNA. Without amplification, such amounts are obtainable only from millions of cells. However, it may be desirable to determine transcript representation in few or even single cells in aspiration biopsies, rare population subsets isolated by cell sorting or laser capture, or micromanipulated single cells. Nucleic-acid amplification methods could be used in these cases, but it is difficult to amplify different transcripts in a sample without distorting quantitative relationships between them. Linear isothermal RNA amplification has been used to amplify as little as 10 ng of total cellular RNA, corresponding to the amount obtainable from thousands of cells, while still preserving the original abundance relationships. However, the available procedures require multiple steps, are labor intensive and time consuming, and have not been shown to preserve abundance information from smaller starting amounts. Exponential amplification, on the other hand, is a relatively simple technology, but is generally considered to bias abundance relationships unacceptably. These constraints have placed beyond current reach the secure and routine application of microarray analysis to single or small numbers of cells. Here we describe results obtained with a rapid and highly optimized global reverse transcription#150;PCR (RT-PCR) procedure. Contrary to prevalent expectations, the exponential approach preserves abundance relationships through amplification as high as 3 x 10(11)-fold. Further, it reduces by a million-fold the input amount of RNA needed for microarray analysis, and yields reproducible results from the picogram range of total RNA obtainable from single cells.
90	DR	12169543	MOTIVATION: Maintaining and controlling data quality is a key problem in large scale microarray studies. In particular systematic changes in experimental conditions across multiple chips can seriously affect quality and even lead to false biological conclusions. Traditionally the influence of these effects can be minimized only by expensive repeated measurements, because a detailed understanding of all process relevant parameters seems impossible. RESULTS: We introduce a novel method for microarray process control that estimates quality based solely on the distribution of the actual measurements without requiring repeated experiments. A robust version of principle component analysis detects single outlier microarrays and thereby enables the use of techniques from multivariate statistical process control. In particular, the T(2) control chart reliably tracks undesired changes in process relevant parameters. This can be used to improve the microarray process itself, limits necessary repetitions to only affected samples and therefore maintains quality in a cost effective way. We prove the power of the approach on 3 large sets of DNA methylation microarray data.
90	PR	12147657	NA
90	NR	12139243	Laser capture microdissection (LCM) provides a rapid and simple method for procuring homogeneous populations of cells. However, reproducible isolation of intact RNAfrom these cells can be problematic; the sample may deteriorate before or during sectioning, RNA may degrade during slide staining and LCM, and inadequate extraction and isolation methods may lead to poor recovery. Our report describes an optimized protocol for preparation of frozen sections for LCM using the HistoGene Frozen Section Staining Kit. This slide preparation method is combined with the PicoPure RNA Isolation Kitfor extraction and isolation of RNA from low numbers of microdissected cells. The procedure is easy to perform, rapid, and reproducible. Our results show that the RNA isolated from the LCM samples prepared according to our protocol is of high quality. The RNA maintains its integrity as shown by RT-PCR detection of genes of different abundance levels and by electrophoretic analysis of ribosomal RNA. RNA obtained by this method has also been used to synthesize probes for interrogating cDNA microarray analyses to study expression levels of thousands of genes from LCM samples.
90	DR	12123529	BACKGROUND: Genome-wide or application-targeted microarrays containing a subset of genes of interest have become widely used as a research tool with the prospect of diagnostic application. Intrinsic variability of microarray measurements poses a major problem in defining signal thresholds for absent/present or differentially expressed genes. Most strategies have used fold-change threshold values, but variability at low signal intensities may invalidate this approach and it does not provide information about false-positives and false negatives. RESULTS: We introduce a method to filter false-positives and false-negatives from DNA microarray experiments. This is achieved by evaluating a set of positive and negative controls by receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis. As an advantage of this approach, users may define thresholds on the basis of sensitivity and specificity considerations. The area under the ROC curve allows quality control of microarray hybridizations. This method has been applied to custom made microarrays developed for the analysis of invasive melanoma derived tumor cells. It demonstrated that ROC analysis yields a threshold with reduced missclassified genes in microarray experiments. CONCLUSIONS: Provided that a set of appropriate positive and negative controls is included on the microarray, ROC analysis obviates the inherent problem of arbitrarily selecting threshold levels in microarray experiments. The proposed method is applicable to both custom made and commercially available DNA microarrays and will help to improve the reliability of predictions from DNA microarray experiments.
90	NR	12117793	MOTIVATION: While the use of cDNA microarrays for functional genomic analysis has become commonplace, relatively little attention has been placed on false positives, i.e. the likelihood that a change in measured radioactive or fluorescence intensity may reflect a change in gene expression when, in fact, there is none. Since cDNA arrays are being increasingly used to rapidly distinguish biomarkers for disease detection and subsequent assay development (Wellman et al., Blood, 96, 398-404, 2000), the impact of false positives can be significant. For the use of this technology, it is necessary to develop quantitative criteria for reduction of false positives with radioactively-labeled cDNA arrays. RESULTS: We used a single source of RNA (HuT78 T lymphoma cells) to eliminate sample variation and quantitatively examined intensity ratios using radioactively labeled cDNA microarrays. Variation in intensity ratios was reduced by processing microarrays in side-by-side (parallel mode) rather than by using the same microarray for two hybridizations (sequential mode). Based on statistical independence, calculation of the expected number of false positives as a function of threshold showed that a detection limit of [log(2)R] >0.65 with agreement from three replicates could be used to identify up- or down-modulated genes. Using this quantitative criteria, gene expression differences between two related T lymphoma cell lines, HuT78 and H9, were identified. The relevance of these findings to the known functional differences between these cell types is discussed.
90	PR	12074162	Here we present a methodology for the normalization of element signal intensities to a mean intensity calculated locally across the surface of a DNA microarray. These methods allow the detection and/or correction of spatially systematic artifacts in microarray data. These include artifacts that can be introduced during the robotic printing, hybridization, washing, or imaging of microarrays. Using array element signal intensities alone, this local mean normalization process can correct for such artifacts because they vary across the surface of the array. The local mean normalization can be usedfor quality control and data correction purposes in the analysis of microarray data. These algorithms assume that array elements are not spatially ordered with regard to sequence or biological function and require that this spatial mapping is identical between the two sets of intensities to be compared. The tool described in this report was developed in the R statistical language and is freely available on the Internet as part of a larger gene expression analysis package. This Web implementation is interactive and user-friendly and allows the easy use of the local mean normalization tool described here, without programming expertise or downloading of additional software.
90	NR	12074093	Incyte Genomics' GEM Gene Expression Microarray is a proven genomics tool used by a large number of pharmaceutical companies to speed up the drug discovery and development process. The development and integration of this technology, together with Incyte's sequence databases and clone resources, have resulted in GEM microarrays that span approximately 60,000 human genes as well as approximately 60,000 plant, rat, mouse, yeast, and bacterial genes. The technology underlying the use of these arrays and their application to the drug discovery process is highlighted.
90	PR	12060692	In this paper, fluorescent microarray images and various analysis techniques are described to improve the microarray data acquisition processes. Signal intensities produced by rarely expressed genes are initially correctly detected, but they are often lost in corrections for background, log or ratio. Our analyses indicate that a simple correlation between the mean and median signal intensities may be the best way to eliminate inaccurate microarray signals. Unlike traditional quality control methods, the low intensity signals are retained and inaccurate signals are eliminated in this mean and median correlation. With larger amounts of microarray data being generated, it becomes increasingly more difficult to analyze data on a visual basis. Our method allows for the automatic quantitative determination of accurate and reliable signals, which can then be used for normalization. We found that a mean to median correlation of 85% or higher not only retains more data than current methods, but the retained data is more accurate than traditional thresholds or common spot flagging algorithms. We have also found that by using pin microtapping and microvibrations, we can control spot quality independent from initial PCR volume.
90	DR	12047952	The study of gene expression with printed arrays and prefabricated chips is evolving from a qualitative to a quantitative science. Statistical procedures for determining quality control, differential expression, and reproducibility of findings are a natural consequence of this evolution. However, problems inherent to the technologies have raised important issues of how to apply adequate statistical tests. As a consequence, statistical approaches to microarray research are not yet as routine as they are in other sciences. Statistical methods, tailored to microarrays, continue to be adapted and developed. We present an overview of these methods and of outstanding issues in their use and validation.
90	DR	12019778	The use of microarrays to monitor gene expression has become a standard research tool at both academic and industrial research institutions. Quality control of common printing defects during DNA deposition onto glass substrates is critical to maintaining data integrity and preventing the needless consumption of precious RNA, labeling reagents, and time. Here we demonstrate a nondestructive method for monitoring the quality of every spot on every chip of a microarray production run. We have identified many common manufacturing defects, while not perturbing the attachment of our oligonucleotide target to the substrate or altering further hybridization. This protocol is simple, fast, and inexpensive.
90	NR	11934741	MOTIVATION: Microarray technology provides access to expression levels of thousands of genes at once, producing large amounts of data. These datasets are valuable only if they are annotated by sufficiently detailed experiment descriptions. However, in many databases a substantial number of these annotations is in free-text format and not readily accessible to computer-aided analysis. RESULTS: The Multi-Conditional Hybridization Intensity Processing System (M-CHIPS), a data warehousing concept, focuses on providing both structure and algorithms suitable for statistical analysis of a microarray database's entire contents including the experiment annotations. It addresses the rapid growth of the amount of hybridization data, more detailed experimental descriptions, and new kinds of experiments in the future. We have developed a storage concept, a particular instance of which is an organism-specific database. Although these databases may contain different ontologies of experiment annotations, they share the same structure and therefore can be accessed by the very same statistical algorithms. Experiment ontologies have not yet reached their final shape, and standards are reduced to minimal conventions that do not yet warrant extensive description. An ontology-independent structure enables updates of annotation hierarchies during normal database operation without altering the structure. AVAILABILITY AND SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: http://www.dkfz.de/tbi/services/mchips
90	DR	11911792	The advent of the DNA microarray technology has brought with it the exciting possibility of simultaneously observing the expression levels of all genes in an organism. One such microarray technology, called "oligo arrays," manufactures short single strands of DNA (called probes) onto a glass surface using photolithography. An altered or missed step in such a manufacturing protocol can adversely affect all probes using this failed step and is in general impossible to disentangle from experimental variation when using such a defective array. The idea of designing special quality control probes to detect a failed step was first formulated by Hubbell and Pevzner (1999). We consider an alternative formulation of this problem and use a combinatorial design approach to solve it. Our results improve over prior work in guaranteeing coverage of all protocol steps and in being able to tolerate a greater number of unreliable probe intensities.
90	NR	11895911	PURPOSE: Our aims in this pilot study were to determine whether fine needle aspirates (FNAs) provide a sufficient quantity of mRNA for cDNA microarray analysis, produce a set of quality control criteria to accept individual arrays, and determine whether gene expression profiles obtained from FNAs were representative of the source tumor. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Twenty-seven women with breast cancer for treatment with primary surgery had a FNA before and at the time of surgery, and a portion of excised tumor was taken for array analysis. Control experiments were performed using two Ewing's sarcoma xenograft models. mRNA was extracted from the samples and hybridized with the reference (MCF7 cell line) on cDNA microarrays. Statistical methods were applied to identify acceptability criteria for the arrays. RESULTS: Statistical analyses demonstrated that an adequate array could be identified by calculating the SD of the log of fluorescence intensities from the arrays. Using this criterion, only 4 of the 27 patients (15%) had FNA samples suitable for array analysis. Gene expression profiles from the FNAs closely resembled that of the corresponding source tumors and were clearly distinguished from FNAs derived from the xenografts. CONCLUSIONS: SD is a useful quality index for the clinical application of cDNA microarrays. This "proof of principle" study demonstrates that FNAs from primary breast cancers can be used for microarray analysis, although without amplification, it is feasible in only a small proportion of patients. For this to be clinically useful, validated amplification techniques for FNA samples are probably required.
90	NR	11888005	Histopathology has a vital role in determining breast cancer management and pathologists must be part of the clinical team. Carcinoma size, grade, and especially lymph node status remain the best available prognostic factors. Metastatic carcinoma in axillary nodes is more important than any other prognostic factor presently available. ER status is an important predictor of response to endocrine manipulation, but its independent prognostic significance, and that of micrometastatic disease, circulating carcinoma cells and other molecular factors, even well-studied ones such as HER2 status, are less clear. Pathology is the first clinical speciality to subject its practice to rigorous scientific analysis, and it has stood up well. However, workers without appropriate experience in Pathology or scientific design have created difficulties by undertaking poorly planned studies with ill-defined end-points, lacking appropriate quality control. New analytical techniques and therapeutic targets make it essential that we learn from past mistakes and integrate pathologists into the research teams pursing clinical trials and the assessment of new bio-markers. Without this, input resource will be wasted on false leads that could have been curtailed. Morphology alone will not be enough to select patients likely to benefit in trials of new therapies, but selection 'tests' must be appropriate. The confusion of tests for selection of patients to receive Herceptin shows what happens when this process fails. Much of the microarray data being put into data-bases has no quality control, and meta-analysis of this data will produce even more conflict than the clinical trials. This can be avoided, as the ability to standardise is available.
90	PR	11848410	A variety of technical errors have arisen in data analysis when using cDNA or oligonucleotide microarrays. One of the most insidious problems is the saturation of the hybridization signal of high-abundant transcripts. This problem arises from the truncation of the laser fluorescence signal. When the hybridization signal on the microarray is very strong, this truncation can result in serious consequences that may not be readily apparent to the user. As an illustration of this problem, two subclasses of normal human tissue samples (six liver and six lung samples) were analyzed with GeneChip probe arrays to evaluate the patterns of expression for approximately 7000 human genes. Five of these data sets were found to suffer from signal truncation. This caused several tissues to be incorrectly classified using hierarchical clustering. To rectify this problem so that the gene expression data could be properly compared and clustered, we developed a "filtering" procedure that identifies a subset of genes least affected by the signal saturation. This filtering procedure can be obtained at www.hugeindex.org.
90	NR	11848407	NA
90	NR	11737946	BACKGROUND: A key assumption in the analysis of microarray data is that the quantified signal intensities are linearly related to the expression levels of the corresponding genes. To test this assumption, we experimentally examined the relationship between signal and expression for the two types of microarrays we most commonly encounter: radioactively labeled cDNAs on nylon membranes and fluorescently labeled cDNAs on glass slides. RESULTS: We uncovered two sources of nonlinearity. The first, which led to discrepancies in analysis affecting the fluorescent signals, was signal quenching associated with excessive dye concentrations. The second, affecting the radioactive signals, was a nonlinear transformation of the raw data introduced by the scanner. Correction for this transformation was made by some, but not all, image-quantification software packages. CONCLUSIONS: The second type of nonlinearity is more troublesome, because it could not have been predicted a priori. Both types of nonlinearities were detected by simple dilution series, which we recommend as a quality-control step.
90	PR	11717296	We have developed an antisense oligonucleotide microarray for the study of gene expression and regulation in Bacillus subtilis by using Affymetrix technology. Quality control tests of the B. subtilis GeneChip were performed to ascertain the quality of the array. These tests included optimization of the labeling and hybridization conditions, determination of the linear dynamic range of gene expression levels, and assessment of differential gene expression patterns of known vitamin biosynthetic genes. In minimal medium, we detected transcripts for approximately 70% of the known open reading frames (ORFs). In addition, we were able to monitor the transcript level of known biosynthetic genes regulated by riboflavin, biotin, or thiamine. Moreover, novel transcripts were also detected within intergenic regions and on the opposite coding strand of known ORFs. Several of these novel transcripts were subsequently correlated to new coding regions.
90	NR	11570499	Laboratories use different laser-based scanners to scan microarray images. To assess whether results from different scanners are comparable, and thus whether data from different laboratories can be compared, we scanned the same microarray slide with three commercial scanners that use different imaging techniques. After the acquisition of the microarray images produced by the three scanners, the images were quantified using a single imaging software package and protocol. The results were compared, and we found that the data obtained from the three scanners were comparable and that the variations caused by the use of different instruments were negligible, in spite of the fact that the scanners were based on different optical imaging techniques.
90	NR	11568893	Tissue microarray (TMA) technology allows a massive acceleration of studies correlating molecular in situ findings with clinico-pathological information. In this technique, cylindrical tissue samples are taken from up to 1000 different archival tissue blocks and subsequently placed into one empty 'recipient' paraffin block. Sections from TMA blocks can be used for all different types of in situ tissue analyses including immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization. Multiple studies have demonstrated that findings obtained on TMAs are highly representative of their donor tissues, despite the small size of the individual specimens (diameter 0.6 mm). It is anticipated that TMAs will soon become a widely used tool for all types of tissue-based research. The availability of TMAs containing highly characterized tissues will enable every researcher to perform studies involving thousands of tumours rapidly. Therefore, TMAs will lead to a significant acceleration of the transition of basic research findings into clinical applications. Copyright 2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
90	DR	11470890	A new integrated image analysis package with quantitative quality control schemes is described for cDNA microarray technology. The package employs an iterative algorithm that utilizes both intensity characteristics and spatial information of the spots on a microarray image for signal-background segmentation and defines five quality scores for each spot to record irregularities in spot intensity, size and background noise levels. A composite score q(com) is defined based on these individual scores to give an overall assessment of spot quality. Using q(com) we demonstrate that the inherent variability in intensity ratio measurements is closely correlated with spot quality, namely spots with higher quality give less variable measurements and vice versa. In addition, gauging data by q(com) can improve data reliability dramatically and efficiently. We further show that the variability in ratio measurements drops exponentially with increasing q(com) and, for the majority of spots at the high quality end, this improvement is mainly due to an improvement in correlation between the two dyes. Based on these studies, we discuss the potential of quantitative quality control for microarray data and the possibility of filtering and normalizing microarray data using a quality metrics-dependent scheme.
90	PR	11464521	To generate cDNA arrays in our core laboratory, we amplified about 2300 PCR products from a human, sequence-verified cDNA clone library. As a quality-control step, we sequenced the PCR products immediately before printing. The sequence information was used to search the GenBank database to confirm the identities. Although these clones were previously sequence verified by the company, we found that only 79% of the clones matched the original database after handling. Our experience strongly indicates the necessity to sequence verify the clones at the final stage before printing on microarray slides and to modify the gene list accordingly.
90	DR	11460886	Gene expression analyses by probes of hybridization from mRNA to cDNA targets arrayed on membranes or activated glass surfaces have revolutionized the way of profiling mega level gene expression. The main remaining problems however are sensitivity of detection, reproducibility and data processing. During processing of microarray images, especially irregularities of spot position and shape could generate significant errors: small regions of signal spots can be mis-included into background area and vice versa. Here we report a novel method to eliminate such obstacles by sensing their edges. Application of edge detection technology on separating spots from the background decreases the probability of the errors and gives more accurate information about the states of spots such as the pixel number, degree of fragmentation, width and height of spot, and circumference of spot. Such information can be used for the quality control of cDNA microarray experiments and filtering of low quality spots. We analyzed the cDNA microarray image that contains 10,368 genes using edge detection and compared the result with that of conventional method which draws circle around the spot.
90	NR	11441309	NA
90	NR	11410663	We consider the problem of comparing the gene expression levels of cells grown under two different conditions using cDNA microarray data. We use a quality index, computed from duplicate spots on the same slide, to filter out outlying spots, poor quality genes and problematical slides. We also perform calibration experiments to show that normalization between fluorescent labels is needed and that the normalization is slide dependent and non-linear. A rank invariant method is suggested to select non-differentially expressed genes and to construct normalization curves in comparative experiments. After normalization the residuals from the calibration data are used to provide prior information on variance components in the analysis of comparative experiments. Based on a hierarchical model that incorporates several levels of variations, a method for assessing the significance of gene effects in comparative experiments is presented. The analysis is demonstrated via two groups of experiments with 125 and 4129 genes, respectively, in Escherichia coli grown in glucose and acetate.
90	NR	11307306	NA
90	NR	11292855	The cDNA microarray is one technological approach that has the potential to accurately measure changes in global mRNA expression levels. We report an assessment of an optimized cDNA microarray platform to generate accurate, precise and reliable data consistent with the objective of using microarrays as an acquisition platform to populate gene expression databases. The study design consisted of two independent evaluations with 70 arrays from two different manufactured lots and used three human tissue sources as samples: placenta, brain and heart. Overall signal response was linear over three orders of magnitude and the sensitivity for any element was estimated to be 2 pg mRNA. The calculated coefficient of variation for differential expression for all non-differentiated elements was 12-14% across the entire signal range and did not vary with array batch or tissue source. The minimum detectable fold change for differential expression was 1.4. Accuracy, in terms of bias (observed minus expected differential expression ratio), was less than 1 part in 10 000 for all non-differentiated elements. The results presented in this report demonstrate the reproducible performance of the cDNA microarray technology platform and the methods provide a useful framework for evaluating other technologies that monitor changes in global mRNA expression.
90	DR	11262954	The advent of the DNA microarray technology has brought with it the exciting possibility of simultaneously observing the expression levels of all genes in an organism. One such microarray technology, called "oligo arrays", manufactures short single strands of DNA (called probes) onto a glass surface using photolithography. An altered or missed step in such a manufacturing protocol can adversely affect all probes using this failed step, and is in general impossible to disentangle from experimental variation when using such a defective array. The idea of designing special quality control probes to detect a failed step was first formulated by Hubbell and Pevzner. We consider an alternative formulation of this problem and use a combinatorial design approach to solve it. Our results improve over prior work in guaranteeing coverage of all protocol steps and in being able to tolerate a greater number of unreliable probe intensities.
90	NR	11256580	A DNA microarray system is usually comprised of DNA probes formatted on a microscale on a glass surface (chip), plus the instruments needed to handle samples (automated robotics), to read the reporter molecules (scanners) and analyse the data (bioinformatic tools). Biochips are formed by in situ (on chip) synthesis of oligonucleotides or peptide nucleic acids (PNAs) or spotting of DNA fragments. Hybridisation of RNA- or DNA-derived samples on chips allows the monitoring of expression of mRNAs or the occurrence of polymorphisms in genomic DNA. Basic types of DNA chips are the sequencing chip, the expression chip and chips for comparative genomic hybridisation. Advanced technologies used in automated microarray production are photolithography, mechanical microspotting and ink jets. Bioelectronic microchips contain numerous electronically active microelectrodes with specific DNA capture probes linked to the electrodes through molecular wires. Several biosensors have been used in combination with biochips. PNA biosensors commonly rely on the immobilisation of a single-stranded DNA sequence (the 'probe') onto a transducer surface for hybridisation with the complementary ('target') strand to give a suitable electrical signal. Other sensors are cell-based immunobiosensors with engineered molecular recognition, integrated biosensors based on phototransistor integrated circuits and sensors based on surface plasmon resonance. Microarray technologies offer enormous savings in time and labour as compared to standard gel-based microsatellite methods. Reading of the information and its management by bioinformatics is necessary because of the enormous amount of data generated by the various technologies using microarrays. Standardised procedures are essential for compatible data production, quality control and analysis. Expression monitoring is the most biologically informative application of this technology at present. Microarray technology has important applications in pharmacogenomics: drug discovery and development, drug safety and molecular diagnostics. DNA chips will facilitate the integration of diagnosis and therapeutics, as well as the introduction of personalised medicines.
90	PR	11152090	The analysis of a large number of tumor tissues with conventional techniques of molecular pathology is tedious and slow. The authors recently developed the tissue microarray technology that makes it possible to sample up to 1,000 tumors on one glass slide, which then can be analyzed by fluorescence in situ hybridization, RNA in situ hybridization, or immunohistochemistry. The tissue microarray technology has the potential to significantly accelerate molecular studies that seek associations between molecular changes and clinicopathologic features of the cancer. Examples of potential applications for tissue microarrays include testing and optimization of probes and antibodies, the organization of large tissue repositories, and the facilitation of multicenter studies. Further, tissue microarrays can be used for educational purposes as well as to improve quality control and standardization of staining methods and interpretation. Tissue microarrays have become one of the most promising tools for the molecular and anatomic pathologist and will have many applications in cancer research, as well as in other fields of pathology. This review article gives an overview of current applications of tissue microarrays as well as possible future development of the technology.
90	DR	10907080	A simple, non-destructive procedure is described to determine the quality of DNA arrays before they are used. It consists of a preliminary staining step of the DNA microarray by using SYBR green II, a fluorophore with specific affinity for ssDNA, followed by a laser scan analysis. The surface quality, integrity and homogeneity of each DNA spot of the array can thus be assessed. After this preliminary control, which may avoid further analytical steps that lead to the waste of precious biological samples, a fully reversible staining procedure is performed that produces an array ready for subsequent use.
90	NR	0010669883	Oligonucleotides have become widely used tools in molecular biology and molecular diagnostics. Their parallel synthesis in large numbers and the increasing interest in microarray technology has raised the requirement for fast and informative analytical tools for their quality control. A direct injection electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) technique based on the use of aqueous 2-propanol as running eluent, and spermidine (or triethylamine) as DNA modifiers, has been applied to analyze a large set of samples (about 200 synthetic oligonucleotides) ranging from 5 to 15 kDa (17-51mers) with good results in terms of sensitivity, suppression of sodium adduct formation, and speed of analysis. Copyright 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
91	NR	14599359	The catalytic domain of human tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) converting enzyme (TACE) was expressed in a phage display system to determine whether stable and active enzyme could be made for high-throughput screening (HTS). This would address many issues around screening of proteases in this class. The phage-displayed TACE catalytic domain (PDT) properly cleaved the fusion protein of glutathione S-transferase (GST)-pro-TNF-alpha to generate the mature TNF-alpha in vitro. To determine the utility of the PDT in HTS, the authors further demonstrated that PDT was able to generate a strong reproducible fluorescence signal by cleaving a fluorogenic TNF-alpha-specific peptide in vitro. More important, the catalytic activity of the PDT was inhibited by a broad-spectrum matrix metalloprotease (MMP) inhibitor but not by an MMP-I specific inhibitor, illustrating the potential utility of PDT for HTS. The PDT was also compared with baculovirus-expressed TACE (BET) in these assays to establish the relative efficacy of PDT. Both PDT and BET showed a similar specific cleavage profile against the defined substrates. Activity of the BET, however, was stable at 4 degrees C for less than 24 h. In contrast, the PDT exhibited remarkable stability, losing very little activity even after 2 years at 4 degrees C. On the basis of these results, the authors concluded that the phage display system might be a useful tool for expressing proteins that have stability issues related to auto-proteolytic activity. Furthermore, the ease and low cost of large-scale production of phage should make it suitable for assay development and HTS.
91	NR	12874813	The S3 ribosomal protein of Drosophila melanogaster possesses various DNA repair activities, including the capacity to incise at apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP) sites and 8-oxo-7,8-dihydroguanine (8-oxoG) residues. We have recently hypothesized that this multifunctional protein may improve the efficiency of DNA base excision repair (BER) in mammalian cells. We have investigated the effect of pure GST-tagged Drosophila S3 on BER of different endogenous lesions performed by human and mouse cell extracts. Drosophila S3 significantly accelerated the BER of 8-oxoG (initiated by the bifunctional glycosylase OGG1). The stimulating effect was linked to the capacity of S3 to remove the 8-oxoG lesion and cleave the resulting AP site, rather than acceleration of downstream steps of the BER pathway (e.g., removal of 3' blocking fragments). No stimulating effect was observed on the BER of uracil, natural AP sites, and beta-lyase-cleaved AP sites. Heterologous expression of Drosophila S3 may be used to enhance 8-oxoG repair in human cells.
91	DR	12548987	A 1.1 bp fragment of E2 gene of Chinese classical swine fever virus(CSFV) Shimen strain, a standard virulent strain, was amplified by RT-PCR from total RNA of cell cultures infected by CSFV, and cloned into pGEM T vector. The nucleotide sequence of this fragment was sequenced by Sanger's method and the amino acid sequence was deduced. Compared with the corresponding region of Alfort, Brescia and C strain of CSFV, the nucleotide sequence homology is 84.7%, 92.6% and 95.2% respectively, and the amino acid sequence 89.4%, 92.6% and 94.6%, respectively, we subcloned 1.1 bp of E2 gene cDNA into baculovirus transfer vector and successfully constructed two recombinant baculoviruses expressing GST-E2 and GST-GFP-E2 fusion protein respectively by homologous recombination in sf-9 cell. Furthermore, we also constructed recombinant eukaryotic expression vector pcE2 containing E2 gene in frame and transfected COS-7 cell by lipofectamine, the indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA) showed that the expressed E2 protein can be recognized by E2 specific monoclonal antibody the pcE2 DNA was directly injected into BALB/c mice intramuscular(i.m.) and the CSFV E2-specific antibodies was measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay(ELISA) the ELISA results indicated the E2-specific antibodies was induced in inoculated mice and virus neutralization assays also indicate single inoculations of plasmids expressing CSFV E2 glycoprotein raised neutralizing antibody in BALB/c mice. these results will be beneficial to investigate the possibility of DNA vaccine against CSFV.
91	NR	12379220	The ubiquitous eukaryotic protein kinase CKII (casein kinase II) has been found to interact with a number of cellular proteins, either through the catalytic subunit or the regulatory subunit. Using the yeast two-hybrid screening method, we found that the catalytic subunit of Drosophila melanogaster CKII (DmCKII) interacts with Drosophila ribosomal protein L22 (rpL22). This interaction was also observed in vitro with a glutathione-S-transferase (GST)-rpL22 fusion protein. The predicted full-length Drosophila rpL22 protein has an N-terminal extension rich in alanine, lysine, and proline that appears to be unique to Drosophila. Deletion mapping revealed that the conserved core of rpL22 is responsible for the interaction with CKII. Moreover, purified DmCKII can phosphorylate a GST-L22 fusion protein at the C-terminal end, suggesting that this protein may be a substrate of CKII in Drosophila.
91	NR	12234668	Temporal expression profile of lef4, the gene encoding late gene expression factor 4 (LEF4) from the baculovirus, Bombyx mori nucleopolyhedrovirus (BmNPV), has been analysed. lef4 behaved like an early gene and the transcripts were detectable from 6 h post infection (hpi) which reached maximal levels by 18-24 hpi, and declined considerably at later times. The LEF4 open reading frame was bacterially expressed as a glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion protein which was solubilized from the inclusion bodies and purified by adsorption to the affinity matrix, GST-Sepharose. Using polyclonal antibodies raised against the bacterially expressed protein, the temporal profile of LEF4 synthesis in BmNPV-infected BmN cells was analysed. The LEF4 protein levels were also higher at 24 hpi compared to 12 or 36 hpi, correlating with the RNA patterns. The protein was predominantly localized to the nucleus of the infected BmN cell and only a small portion was present in the cytosolic fraction. Preliminary studies with antisense lef4 expression revealed substantial reduction in expression from the viral polyhedrin promoter without significantly affecting the viral DNA replication.
91	PR	12190118	The biochemical and biophysical characteristics of Janus protein-tyrosine kinases (JAKs), which are essential early mediators of cytokine-initiated signal propagation, are virtually undefined. To facilitate the in vitro analysis of JAK-mediated catalysis, we substantially purified a soluble recombinant JAK2 and developed a novel means of quantifying JAK-catalyzed product formation. Glutathione-S-transferase fusion proteins containing active and inactive forms of rat Janus kinase 2 (GST:rJAK2 and GST:rJAK2(CA795)) were highly purified via affinity chromatography. A microtiterplate-based ELISA was used to measure tyrosine phosphorylation of a streptavidin-immobilized biotinylated STAT1-derived peptide. The ELISA data indicated that only about 1% of the enzyme was involved in exogenous substrate phosphorylation. Other immobilized peptides served as apparent substrates with varying efficacy. Traditional radioisotopic autokinase assays demonstrated that the activity of the purified fusion protein was inhibited by a variety of tyrphostin inhibitors. Non-radiolabeled adenine nucleotides, but not guanine nucleotides, inhibited the radioisotopic autokinase assay. These observations verify that the catalytic activity of JAK2 is highly regulated, and are consistent with the suggestion that JAK2 may require additional accessory proteins, such as a potential upstream regulatory kinase, for full catalytic activity.
91	DR	12186657	BACKGROUND: The S. cerevisiae origin recognition complex binds to the ARS consensus sequence in an ATP dependent fashion. Recently, the yeast Cdc6 has been reported to have DNA binding activity. Conservation of replication proteins among different species strongly supports their functional similarity. Here we report the results of an investigation into the DNA binding activity of human Cdc6 protein. Cdc6 was expressed and purified from baculovirus infected Sf9 (Spodoptera frugiperda) insect cells as GST fusion protein (GST-Cdc6) and its DNA binding activity was tested. RESULTS: Partially purified fractions containing GSTCdc6 or GST showed an ACS binding activity in an ATP dependent manner. However, further purification revealed the presence of a putative 35 kDa insect cell protein (p35) which was found responsible for the DNA binding activity. A close match to the 9/11 bases of the ARS consensus sequence was sufficient for p35 binding activity. A DNA fragment from the human c-myc origin region containing yeast ACS like elements also showed p35 binding activity. CONCLUSIONS: We have identified a Spodoptera frugiperda protein with ATP dependent DNA binding activity to ACS like elements. ACS like elements have been reported to be essential for ORC binding and replication initiation in yeast but their role in higher eukaryotes still remains elusive. Like the ARS consensus sequence elements of yeast, ACS like elements found in c-myc and lamin beta 2 origin regions may play similar roles in replication and indicate a conserved role for this DNA motif among eukaryotes.
91	DR	12174264	A refractile body antigen Etp28 Gene of Eimeria tenella (Guangdong Strain) sporozoites was cloned by PCR from the synthesized first strand cDNA. It has a high homology with the previously reported Etp28 gene of Merck Strain LS18. The gene was expressed through standard procedures in the modified Autographa californica nuclear polyhedrosis virus (AcMNPV-OCC(-)) expression system and large amount of heterologous fusion protein (GST-6xHis-Etp28) was obtained. The expression product was about 21.3% of the total cellular protein of an infected cell and corresponding to approximately 0.42 mg of recombinant protein per 10(6) cells. And the immunoprotective trial showed that this candidate for recombinant vaccine conferred partial protection against chicken coccidiosis.
91	DR	12144509	A synthetic modified gene encoding the human calcitonin analog (hmCT) was expressed by use of the baculovirus expression system. After injection with recombinant baculoviruses, the hmCT-GST fusion protein was produced within the silkworm larvae. The fusion protein was purified by affinity chromatography. Biological activity of hmCT for hypercalcemic effect was determined in normal rats.
91	NR	12121618	The covalent attachment of ubiquitin to proteins is an evolutionarily conserved signal for rapid protein degradation. However, additional cellular functions for ubiquitination are now emerging, including regulation of protein trafficking and endocytosis. For example, recent genetic studies suggested a role for ubiquitination in regulating epsin, a modular endocytic adaptor protein that functions in the assembly of clathrin-coated vesicles; however, biochemical evidence for this notion has been lacking. Epsin consists of an epsin NH(2)-terminal homology (ENTH) domain that promotes the interaction with phospholipids, several AP2 binding sites, two clathrin binding sequences, and several Eps15 homology (EH) domain binding motifs. Interestingly, epsin also possesses several recently described ubiquitin-interacting motifs (UIMs) that have been postulated to bind ubiquitin. Here, we demonstrate that epsin is predominantly monoubiquitinated and resistant to proteasomal degradation. The UIMs are necessary for epsin ubiquitination but are not the site of ubiquitination. Finally, we demonstrate that the isolated UIMs from both epsin and an unrelated monoubiquitinated protein, Eps15, are sufficient to promote ubiquitination of a chimeric glutathione-S-transferase (GST)-UIM fusion protein. Thus, our data suggest that UIMs may serve as a general signal for ubiquitination.
91	NR	12054521	An inhibitor of the apoptosis protein (IAP) family gene from Trichoplusia ni, Tn-IAP1v, a variant of lepidopteran Tn-IAP1, was cloned by RT-PCR. There are six single nucleotide polymorphisms between the two Tn-IAP1 variants, resulting in three predicted single amino acid polymorphisms. With the GST fusion expression system, soluble recombinant Tn-IAP1v was highly expressed in Escherichia coli and then purified by affinity chromatography. Caspase inhibition assays indicated that recombinant Tn-IAP1v could specifically inhibit human caspase-9 in vitro instead of caspase-3, -7, and -8, which was further confirmed by the observation that recombinant Tn-IAP1v can directly bind caspase-9 in the protein pull-down assay. These results suggested that Tn-IAP1v might serve as an initiator caspase inhibitor in vivo in the conserved mitochondria apoptotic pathway.
91	NR	12048062	The non-structural protein 5b (NS5b) of hepatitis C virus (HCV), bearing an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) activity, is considered as a new target of antiviral therapy. We expressed and purified the C-terminal 21 amino acid truncated NS5b protein fused with glutathione S-transferase (GST-5bC21) using Escherichia coli. With the highly purified GST-5bC21 protein, we established an in vitro assay system for RdRp activity by using poly(C) as the template and a 12 mer oligo(rG) as the primer. The optimal conditions for testing various concentrations of template, primer and proteins were determined to 22 degrees C and a pH of 7.5. The addition of 2.5 mM Mn(2+) increased the activity profoundly, to a level fivefold higher than that in the presence of 10 mM Mg(2+). At higher concentrations of Mn(2+), GST-5bC21 is stable as compared with previously reported full-length NS5b expressed using insect cells or NS5b protein with the C-terminal 18 amino acids deleted. This sensitive and easy to use quantitative assay system will provide a stable system for the screening of inhibitors for HCV RdRp.
91	NR	11886777	A new Anopheles dirus glutathione S-transferase (GST) has been obtained and named adGST4-1. Both genomic DNA and cDNA for heterologous expression were acquired. The genomic sequence was 3188bp and consisted of the GST gene as well as flanking sequence. The flanking sequence was analyzed for possible regulatory elements that would control gene expression. In Drosophila several of these elements have been shown to be involved in development and cell differentiation. The deduced amino acid sequence has low identity compared with the four alternatively spliced enzymes, adGST1-1 to 1-4, from another An. dirus GST gene adgst1AS1. The percent identities are 30--40% and 11--12% comparing adGST4-1 to insect GSTs from Delta and Sigma classes, respectively. Enzyme characterization of adGST4-1 shows it to be distinct from the other An. dirus GSTs because of low enzyme activity for customary GST substrates including 1-chloro-2, 4-dinitrobenzene (CDNB). However, this enzyme has a greater affinity of interaction with pyrethroids compared to the other An. dirus GSTs.
91	DR	11865050	Tie1 is an orphan receptor tyrosine kinase that is expressed almost exclusively in endothelial cells and that is required for normal embryonic vascular development. Genetic studies suggest that Tie1 promotes endothelial cell survival, but other studies have suggested that the Tie1 kinase has little to no activity, and Tie1-mediated signaling pathways are unknown. To begin to study Tie1 signaling, a recombinant glutathione S-transferase (GST)-Tie1 kinase fusion protein was produced in insect cells and found to be autophosphorylated in vitro. GST-Tie1 but not a kinase-inactive mutant associated with a recombinant p85 SH2 domain protein in vitro, suggesting that Tie1 might signal through phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3-kinase. To study Tie1 signaling in a cellular context, a c-fms-Tie1 chimeric receptor (fTie1) was expressed in NIH 3T3 cells. Ligand stimulation of fTie1 resulted in Tie1 autophosphorylation and downstream activation of PI 3-kinase and Akt. Stimulation of fTie1-expressing cells potently inhibited UV irradiation-induced apoptosis in a PI 3-kinase-dependent manner. Moreover, both Akt phosphorylation and inhibition of apoptosis were abrogated by mutation of tyrosine 1113 to phenylalanine, suggesting that this residue is an important PI 3-kinase binding site. These findings are the first biochemical demonstration of a signal transduction pathway and corresponding cellular function for Tie1, and the antiapoptotic effect of Tie1 is consistent with the results of previous genetic studies.
91	NR	11810239	We have recently identified beta(3)-endonexin as a molecule that interacts with cyclin A-associated kinase. In this study, beta(3)-endonexin mutants were constructed by PCR-based site-directed mutagenesis, and characterized. Beta(3)-endonexin has a cyclin binding motif, RxL, in its N-terminal region, and two SP sequences which resemble a known target site for cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks). The R5A/L7A mutant of beta(3)-endonexin, in which the RxL motif has been changed to AxA, is unable to bind to cyclin A, as revealed by two-hybrid experiments and in vitro pull-down assays. A GST-beta(3)-endonexin fusion, but not the corresponding R5A/L7A mutant, inhibits phosphorylation of Rb protein by cyclin A/Cdk2 in vitro. A cyclin A/Cdk2 kinase complex produced in, and purified from, insect cells phosphorylated GST-beta(3)-endonexin in vitro. The S33A or S46A mutant is partially phosphorylated by cyclin A/Cdk2, whereas no phosphorylation of the S33A/S46A double mutant is detectable. This demonstrates that these two serine residues, each of which is followed by a proline residue, are target sites for phosphorylation by cyclin A-associated kinase. The R5A/L7A mutant form of beta(3)-endonexin, which is defective for binding to cyclin A, is also not phosphorylated by cyclin A/Cdk2, confirming that the phosphorylation requires binding to cyclin A in the kinase complex. The neutralizing effect of beta(3)-endonexin on the toxicity associated with the expression of full-length human cyclin A in budding yeast is correlated with its ability to bind to cyclin A. Taken together, these data suggest that beta(3)-endonexin is phosphorylated by cyclinA/Cdk2 in vitro and that cyclin A-associated kinase activity is inhibited by the binding of beta(3)-endonexin to the kinase complex.
91	NR	11755059	Full length clones of ecdysteroid receptor (EcR) and Ultraspiracle (USP) from Chironomus tentans were expressed as GST fusion proteins in E. coli and purified by affinity chromatography. The absence of detergents during the purification procedure is essential for retaining receptor function, especially ligand binding. Presence of USP is mandatory for ligand binding to EcR, but no other cofactors or posttranslational modifications seem to be important, since Scatchard plots revealed the same characteristics (two high affinity binding sites for Ponasterone A with K(D1)=0.24+/-0.1nM and K(D2)=3.9+/-1.3.nM) as found in 0.4 M NaCl extracts of Chironomus cells. Gel mobility shift assays showed binding of the heterodimer to PAL and DR5 even after removal of the GST-tag, whereas EcR binding to PAL1 is GST-dependent. USP binds preferentially to DR5. Addition of unprogrammed reticulocyte lysate improves ligand binding only slightly. Removal of GST has no effect on (3)H-ponasterone A binding, but alters DNA binding characteristics. Calculation of specific binding (5.3+3.0 nmol/mg GST EcR) revealed that 47+/-26% of purified receptor protein was able to bind ligand. The addition of purified EcR to cell extracts of hormone resistant subclones of the epithelial cell line from C. tentans, which have lost their ability to bind ligand, restores specific binding of (3)H-ponasterone A.
91	DR	11722175	A recombinant baculovirus system was used to express the human taurine transporter in Sf9 cells and characterize its mediated uptake activity. This uptake process exhibited: (i) Na(+) dependence, (ii) larger inhibition of taurine transport by competing beta-amino acids than by alpha- and gamma-amino acids, (iii) apparent Michaelis constant, K(t), for taurine transport of 1.6 +/- 0.2 microM, and (iv) a maximal velocity, V(max), of 262 +/- 18 pmol/mg protein per 15 min. Coexpression of a molecular chaperone, human calnexin, enhanced taurine transporter activity by 43%. During development of taurine transporter expression, exposure to tunicamycin (10 microg/ml) decreased taurine transport activity by 76%. The taurine transporter linked to glutathione S-transferase (GST) was expressed to determine whether this conjugate also elicits taurine transport activity. Even though transport activity was markedly decreased, its Na(+) dependence was still evident. Coexpression of calnexin enhanced expression of this conjugated transporter activity by 54%. Immunoblot analysis revealed that calnexin did not change the amount of GST-taurine transporter conjugate or its molecular mass (i.e., 58.4-68.0 kDa). However, tunicamycin decreased its molecular mass. Taken together, taurine transport activity in a baculovirus expression system has characteristics similar to its wild-type counterpart. Stimulation of transport activity by coexpression with calnexin suggests the importance of transporter folding for optimal transport activity. Glycosylation of the transporter also increases its transport activity. Finally, GST-taurine transporter conjugate usage may aid transporter purification even though its transport activity decreases.
91	DR	11714281	To study the role of kinase dimerization in the activation of the insulin receptor (IR) and the insulin-like growth factor receptor-1 (IGF-1R), we have cloned, expressed, and purified monomeric and dimeric forms of the corresponding soluble kinase domains via the baculovirus expression system. Dimerization of the kinases was achieved by fusion of the kinase domains to the homodimeric glutathione S-transferase (GST). Kinetic analyses revealed that kinase dimerization results in substantial increases (10-100-fold) in the phosphotransferase activity in both the auto- and substrate phosphorylation reactions. Furthermore, kinase dimerization rendered the autophosphorylation reaction concentration-independent. However, whereas dimerization was required for the rapid autophosphorylation of the kinases, it was not essential for the enhanced kinase activity in substrate phosphorylation reactions. Comparison of HPLC-phosphopeptide maps of the monomeric and dimeric kinases revealed that dimerization leads to an increased phosphorylation of the regulatory activation loop of the kinases, strongly suggesting that bis- and trisphosphorylation of the activation loop are mediated by transphosphorylation within the kinase dimers. Most strikingly, limited proteolysis revealed that GST-mediated dimerization by itself had a major impact on the conformation of the activation loop by stabilizing a conformation that corresponds to the active, phosphorylated form of the kinase. Thus, in analogy to the insulin/IGF-1-ligated holoreceptors, the dimeric GST-kinases are primed to rapid autophosphorylation by an increase in the local concentration of both phosphoryl donor and phosphoryl acceptor sites and by a dimerization-induced conformational change of the activation loop that leads to an efficient transphosphorylation of the regulatory tyrosine residues.
91	NR	11682052	Cingulin, a M(r) 140-160 kDa protein of the cytoplasmic plaque of epithelial tight junctions (TJ), interacts in vitro with TJ proteins and myosin. Here we investigated cingulin interaction with actin, using His-tagged, full-length Xenopus laevis cingulin expressed in insect cells, and glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion proteins of fragments of cingulin expressed in bacteria. Purified full-length cingulin co-pelleted with F-actin after high speed centrifugation, and promoted the sedimentation of F-actin under low speed centrifugation, suggesting that cingulin is an actin-cross-linking protein. The actin interaction of GST fusion proteins containing fragments of Xenopus cingulin suggested that the F-actin binding site is between residues 101 and 294.
91	NR	11520687	Many insect cuticular proteins include a 35-36 amino acid motif known as the R&R consensus. The extensive conservation of this region led to the suggestion that it functions to bind chitin. Provocatively, it has no sequence similarity to the well-known cysteine-containing chitin-binding domain found in chitinases and some peritrophic membrane proteins. Using fusion proteins expressed in E. coli, we show that an extended form of the R&R consensus from proteins of hard cuticles is necessary and sufficient for chitin binding. Recombinant AGCP2b, a putative cuticular protein from the mosquito Anopheles gambiae, was expressed in E. coli and the purified protein shown to bind to chitin beads. A stretch of 65 amino acids from AGCP2b, including the R&R consensus, conferred chitin binding to glutathione-S-transferase (GST). Directed mutagenesis of some conserved amino acids within this extended R&R consensus from hard cuticle eliminated chitin binding. Thus arthropods have two distinct classes of chitin binding proteins, those with the chitin-binding domain found in lectins, chitinases and peritrophic membranes (cysCBD) and those with the cuticular protein chitin-binding domain (non-cysCBD).
91	NR	11506702	The ost protooncogene encodes a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for the Rho family of small GTPases, RhoA and Cdc42. The N-terminal domain of Ost (Ost-N) appears to negatively regulate the oncogenic activity of the protein, as deletion of this domain drastically increases its transforming activity in NIH 3T3 cells. Using a yeast two-hybrid system, we identified five genes encoding proteins that can interact with Ost-N. One of them, designated OSTIP2 (Ost interacting protein 2), encoded a previously uncharacterized protein. The OSTIP2 product is highly expressed in skeletal muscle as a 1.2-kb transcript. Full-length OSTIP2 cDNA contained an ORF of 193 amino acids. Transcription-coupled translation of OSTIP2 cDNA in reticulocyte lysates revealed a protein product of 20 kDa, which corresponded to the predicted size of the protein. Bacterially expressed glutathione S-transferase (GST)-Ostip2 fusion protein efficiently associated in vitro with baculovirus-expressed Ost. Interestingly, expression of Ostip2 in NIH 3T3 cells efficiently induced foci of morphologically transformed cells. Moreover, inoculation of athymic (nude) mice with OSTIP2 transfectants strongly induced tumor formation. These results suggest that Ostip2 is a novel oncoprotein that can interact with the Rho exchange factor Ost.
91	NR	11500090	Using an Escherichia coli expression system, pGEX-2T, that expresses foreign sequences as fusion proteins with a glutathione S-transferase (GST) carrier, we have expressed a virus enhancing factor (EF) from Pseudaletia separata entomopoxvirus, which enhances P. unipuncta multi nucleopolyhedrovirus (PsunMNPV) infection in larvae of the armyworm, P. separata. The lysates of transformed E. coli cells, which were not active in enhancing PsunMNPV infection, became active when treated with either trypsin or thrombin. The GST-EF fusion protein in a lysate was purified with a bulk GST purification module and cleaved into the EF and GST moieties with thrombin. Removal of the GST moiety with glutathione-Sepharose 4B resulted in a highly purified EF preparation, which enhanced PsunMNPV infection in armyworm larvae and PsunMNPV fusion with an armyworm cell line, SIE-MSH-805-F.
91	NR	11439246	Three cDNA sequences of glutathione S-transferase (GST), adgst1-2, adgst1-3 and adgst1-4, which are alternatively spliced products of the adgst1AS1 gene, were obtained from fourth instar larvae of Anopheles dirus mosquito by reverse transcriptase PCR reactions. The nucleotide sequences of these three cDNAs share >67% identity and the translated amino acid sequences share 61-64% identity. A comparison of the An. dirus to the An. gambiae enzymes shows that adGST1-2 versus agGST1-4, adGST1-3 versus agGST1-5 and adGST1-4 versus agGST1-3 have 85, 92 and 85% amino acid sequence identity, respectively, which confirms that orthologous isoenzymes occur across anopheline species. These three proteins were expressed at high levels, approximately 15-20 mg from 200 ml of E. coli culture. The recombinant enzymes were purified by affinity chromatography on an S-hexylglutathione agarose column. The subunit sizes of adGST1-2, adGST1-3 and adGST1-4 are 24.3, 23.9 and 25.1 kDa. The recombinant enzymes have high activities with 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene (CDNB), detectable activity with 1,2-dichloro-4-nitrobenzene but markedly low activity with ethacrynic acid and p-nitrophenethyl bromide. adGST1-3 was shown to be the most active enzyme from the kinetic studies. Permethrin inhibition of CDNB activity, at varying concentrations of CDNB, was significantly different, being uncompetitive for adGST1-2, noncompetitive for adGST1-3 and competitive for adGST1-4. In contrast, permethrin inhibition with varying glutathione concentrations was noncompetitive for all three GSTs. Despite the enzymes being splicing products of the same gene and sharing identical sequence in the N-terminal 45 amino acids, these GSTs show distinct substrate specificities, kinetic properties and inhibition properties modulated by the differences in the C-terminus.
91	DR	11369891	Translation elongation factor 1delta (EF-1delta) is hyperphosphorylated in various mammalian cells infected with alpha-, beta- and gammaherpesviruses and EF-1delta modification is mediated by viral protein kinases, including UL13 of herpes simplex virus type 1 and UL97 of human cytomegalovirus. In this study, the following is reported. (i) BGLF4 encoded by the prototype gammaherpesvirus Epstein-Barr virus was purified as a fusion protein that was labelled with [gamma-(32)P]ATP and labelling was eliminated by phosphatase. (ii) The ratio of the hyperphosphorylated form of human EF-1delta was increased both in Sf9 cells after infection with baculoviruses expressing GST-BGLF4 fusion proteins and in COS-7 cells after transfection with a BGLF4 expression plasmid. These results indicate that purified BGLF4 possesses protein kinase activity and mediates EF-1delta hyperphosphorylation. These data also support the hypothesis that the protein kinases that are conserved by herpesviruses universally mediate EF-1delta modification in mammalian cells.
91	NR	11311147	Calmodulin-binding sites on target proteins show considerable variation in primary sequence; hence compounds that block the access of calmodulin to these binding sites may be more selective than compounds that inactivate calmodulin. Suramin and its analogue NF307 inhibit the interaction of calmodulin with the ryanodine receptor. We have investigated whether inhibition of calmodulin binding to target proteins is a general property of these compounds. Suramin inhibited binding of [(125)I]calmodulin to porcine brain membranes and to sarcoplasmic reticulum from skeletal muscle (IC(50)=4.9+/-1.2 microM and 19.9+/-1.8 microM, respectively) and blocked the cross-linking of [(125)I]calmodulin to some, but not all, target proteins in brain membranes by [(125)I]calmodulin. Four calmodulin-binding proteins were purified [ryanodine receptor-1 (RyR1) from rabbit skeletal muscle, neuronal NO synthase (nNOS) from Sf9 cells, G-protein betagamma dimers (Gbetagamma) from porcine brain and a glutathione S-transferase-fusion protein comprising the C-terminal calmodulin-binding domain of the metabotropic glutamate receptor 7A (GST-CmGluR7A) from bacterial lysates]. Three of the proteins employed (Gbetagamma, GST-CmGluR7A and RyR1) display a comparable affinity for calmodulin (in the range of 50-70 nM). Nevertheless, suramin and NF307 only blocked the binding of Gbetagamma and RyR1 to calmodulin-Sepharose. In contrast, the association of GST-CmGluR7A and nNOS was not impaired, whereas excess calmodulin uniformly displaced all proteins from the matrix. Thus suramin and NF307 are prototypes of a new class of calmodulin antagonists that do not interact directly with calmodulin but with calmodulin-recognition sites. In addition, these compounds discriminate among calmodulin-binding motifs.
91	DR	11223144	When tumors undergo the angiogenic switch, cell growth and tissue invasion is facilitated by the formation of new capillaries from preexisting blood vessels, a process known as angiogenesis. Growth factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor/vascular permeability factor (VEGF/VPF) and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) trigger the process of angiogenesis. Here we describe a protocol for the expression and one-step purification of human recombinant GST-FGF receptor type 1 (FGFR-1) from Sf9 cells. This protocol allows generating an active kinase as indicated by its reactivity with a monoclonal antibody to phosphorylated tyrosine. The purified enzyme displays a specific activity of 1.2 x 10(4) pmol mg(-1) min(-1), which is in the range of activities reported for homogeneously purified recombinant kinases. We have employed a number of compounds to show that the GST-FGFR-1 preparation is suitable to the identification of tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Considering that inhibitors of angiogenesis may represent an attractive tool in therapeutic strategies targeting invasive metastatic tumors the results presented here, along with available data on the structure of the ATP-binding pocket of FGFR-1, should facilitate the rational design of specific FGFR-1 inhibitory compounds.
91	NR	11076525	We have isolated human cDNA for a novel type 1 protein phosphatase (PP1) inhibitory protein, named inhibitor-4 (I-4), from a cDNA library of germ cell tumors. I-4, composed of 202 amino acids, is 44% identical to a PP1 inhibitor, inhibitor-2 (I-2). I-4 conserves functionally important structure of I-2 and exhibited similar biochemical properties. I-4 inhibited activity of the catalytic subunit of PP1 (PP1C), specifically with an IC(50) of 0.2 nM, more potently than I-2 with an IC(50) of 2 nM. I-4 weakly inhibited the activity of myosin-associated phosphates (PP1M). However, the level of inhibition of PP1M was increased during preincubation of PP1M with I-4, suggesting that the inhibition is caused by interaction of I-4 with PP1C in such a manner that it competes with the M subunit of PP1M. Gel overlay experiments showed that I-4 binds PP1C directly. Three I-4 peptides containing the N-terminal residues 1-123, 1-131, and 1-142 all showed strong binding ability to PP1C but did not show PP1 inhibitory activity, whereas an I-2 peptide (residues 1-134), lacking the corresponding C-terminal residues, potently inhibited PP1C activity as previously reported. Removal of the 18 N-terminal amino acid residues from I-4 dramatically reduced the PP1 binding activity with a correlated loss of inhibitory activity, whereas removal of the 10 N-terminal residues had only a little effect. The two peptides GST-I-4(19-131) and GST-I-4(132-202) showed ability to bind to PP1C, albeit very weakly. These results strongly suggest a multiple-point interaction between I-4 and PP1C, which is thought to cause the inhibition of I-4 which is stronger than the inhibition of I-2.
91	NR	11073083	A mature form of porcine interleukin-2 (IL-2) protein without signal peptides was expressed as glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion proteins in Escherichia coli using pGEX vector. Since most of GST-IL-2 fusion protein was detected in an insoluble fraction on SDS-PAGE analysis, the insoluble fusion protein was solubilized by refolding procedure using urea. The recombinant IL-2 (rIL-2) was purified by a batch method using Glutathione Sepharose 4B and factor Xa digestion and used for preparation of antisera in mice. The antisera reacted with rIL-2 expressed in baculovirus system on immunoblot analysis. In addition, the purified rIL-2 showed a high biological activity on CTLL-2 proliferative response.
91	DR	10891408	The hepatitis C virus glycoproteins E1 and 2 have been expressed using recombinant baculoviruses following fusion to the carrier protein glutathione S-transferase (GST). Proteins were expressed singly and as an E1E2 polyprotein with and without an N-terminal affinity tag. Expression of the E1E2 polyprotein, even when preceded by GST, led to processing in insect cells and detection of an E1E2 complex that could be specifically purified by glutathione affinity chromatography. Baculovirus expressed E2 and a purified GST-E1E2 protein bound to the second extracellular loop of CD81 (EC2), a reported ligand for the molecule, but not to a truncated derivative of CD81 consisting of only the central domain of the loop. Purified GST-E2, however, failed to bind to CD81 suggesting a requirement for a free E2 amino terminus for biological activity. The binding to CD81 by baculovirus expressed E2 protein was comparable to that observed for E2 derived from mammalian cells when detected by a monoclonal antibody sensitive to protein conformation. Furthermore, E2 protein expressed in insect cells in the presence of N-butyldeoxynojirimycin, an inhibitor of terminal glucose residue processing, formed complexes with E1 and bound to CD81-EC2 similarly to untreated protein. Together these data suggest that although hyperglucosylation of E2 does not have a major effect on bioactivity, polyprotein processing to reveal the free amino terminus is required.
91	DR	10846177	huCdc7 encodes a catalytic subunit for Saccharomyces cerevisae Cdc7-related kinase complex of human. ASK, whose expression is cell cycle-regulated, binds and activates huCdc7 kinase in a cell cycle-dependent manner (Kumagai, H., Sato, N., Yamada, M., Mahony, D. , Seghezzi, W., Lees, E., Arai, K., and Masai, H. (1999) Mol. Cell. Biol. 19, 5083-5095). We have expressed huCdc7 complexed with ASK regulatory subunit using the insect cell expression system. To facilitate purification of the kinase complex, glutathione S-transferase (GST) was fused to huCdc7 and GST-huCdc7-ASK complex was purified. GST-huCdc7 protein is inert as a kinase on its own, and phosphorylation absolutely depends on the presence of the ASK subunit. It autophosphorylates both subunits in vitro and phosphorylates a number of replication proteins to different extents. Among them, MCM2 protein, either in a free form or in a MCM2-4-6-7 complex, serves as an excellent substrate for huCdc7-ASK kinase complex in vitro. MCM4 and MCM6 are also phosphorylated by huCdc7 albeit to less extent. MCM2 and -4 in the MCM2-4-6-7 complex are phosphorylated by Cdks as well, and prior phosphorylation of the MCM2-4-6-7 complex by Cdks facilitates phosphorylation of MCM2 by huCdc7, suggesting collaboration between Cdks and Cdc7 in phosphorylation of MCM for initiation of S phase. huCdc7 and ASK proteins can also be phosphorylated by Cdks in vitro. Among four possible Cdk phosphorylation sites of huCdc7, replacement of Thr-376, corresponding to the activating threonine of Cdk, with alanine (T376A mutant) dramatically reduces kinase activity, indicative of kinase activation by phosphorylation of this residue. In vitro, Cdk2-Cyclin E, Cdk2-Cyclin A, and Cdc2-Cyclin B, but not Cdk4-Cyclin D1, phosphorylates the Thr-376 residue of huCdc7, suggesting possible regulation of huCdc7 by Cdks.
91	DR	10833407	After affinity purification on immobilized glutathione, insect-cell-derived glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion proteins contain variable amounts of protein contaminants of about 23-24 kDa. We have isolated these glutathione-binding proteins from the widely used Sf9 and Hi5 insect cell lines and characterized them by LC-MS and N-terminal sequencing. Based on the observation that these proteins have higher affinity for glutathione than GST fusions, we have found that by using differential elution conditions the amount of such contaminants in GST fusion preparations can be strongly reduced directly during the affinity purification step. The main interest of these results is that they are not restricted to a specific construct, but rather they seem to apply to various insect-cell-derived GST fusions.
91	NR	10797384	Dobrava hantavirus (DOBV) causes severe hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome in the Balkan region and has been detected recently also in Russia, Estonia, and Germany. DOBV nucleocapsid protein (N) was produced in insect cells, using the baculovirus expression system (bac-DOBV-N), and in E. coli as a truncated (aa 1-165) glutathione-S transferase fusion protein (DOBV-dN-GST). The antigenic properties of bac-DOBV-N were found identical to native DOBV-N when examined by a panel of hantavirus-specific monoclonal antibodies. Enzyme immunoassays for detection of IgM and IgG antibodies were set up using DOBV recombinant N proteins and compared with those based on recombinant Hantaan and Puumala virus N, using panels of sera collected from DOBV, Hantaan and Puumala virus-infected patients. Full-length N protein (bac-DOBV-N) was found to be a more sensitive antigen than DOBV-dN-GST. The sensitivity values for sera from DOBV-infected patients were 100% for bac-DOBV-N and 86% for DOBV-dN-GST by IgM assays, and 98% for bac-DOBV-N and 88% for DOBV-dN-GST by IgG assays. The specificity values were 100% for bac-DOBV-N and 99% for DOBV-dN-GST by IgM assays, and 100% for both antigens by IgG assays.
91	DR	10764822	Protein glycosylation pathways are relatively poorly characterized in insect cells. As part of an overall effort to address this problem, we previously isolated a cDNA from Sf9 cells that encodes an insect alpha1,2-mannosidase (SfManI) which requires calcium and is inhibited by 1-deoxymannojirimycin. In the present study, we have characterized the substrate specificity of SfManI. A recombinant baculovirus was used to express a GST-tagged secreted form of SfManI which was purified from the medium using an immobilized glutathione column. The purified SfManI was then incubated with oligosaccharide substrates and the resulting products were analyzed by HPLC. These analyses showed that SfManI rapidly converts Man(9)GlcNAc(2)to Man(6)Glc-NAc(2)isomer C, then more slowly converts Man(6)GlcNAc(2)isomer C to Man(5)GlcNAc(2). The slow step in the processing of Man(9)GlcNAc(2)to Man(5)GlcNAc(2)by SfManI is removal of the alpha1,2-linked mannose on the middle arm of Man(9)GlcNAc(2). In this respect, SfManI is similar to mammalian alpha1,2-mannosidases IA and IB. However, additional HPLC and(1)H-NMR analyses demonstrated that SfManI converts Man(9)GlcNAc(2)to Man(5)GlcNAc(2)primarily through Man(7)GlcNAc(2)isomer C, the archetypal Man(9)GlcNAc(2)missing the lower arm alpha1,2-linked mannose residues. In this respect, SfManI differs from mammalian alpha1,2-mannosidases IA and IB, and is the first alpha1,2-mannosidase directly shown to produce Man(7)GlcNAc(2)isomer C as a major processing intermediate.
91	NR	10737920	A cDNA clone encoding a small GTP binding protein (Brho) was isolated from an embryonic cDNA library of Bombyx mori that encoded a polypeptide with 202 amino acids sharing 60-80% similarity with the Rho1 family of GTP binding proteins. The effector site and one of the guanine nucleotide binding sites differed from other members of the Rho family. To characterize the biochemical properties of Brho, the clone was expressed in Escherichia coli as a glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion protein. The recombinant protein was purified to homogeneity with glutathione S-Sepharose. The fusion protein bound [(35)S] GTPgammaS and [(3)H] GDP with association constants of 11x10(6) M(-1) and 6.2x10(6) M(-1), respectively. The binding of [(35)S] GTPgammaS was inhibited by GTP and GDP, but by no other nucleotides. The calculated GTP-hydrolysis activity was 89.6 m mol/min/mol of Brho. Bound [(35)S] GTPgammaS and [(3)H] GDP were exchanged with GTPgammaS most efficiently in the presence of 6 mM MgCl(2). These results suggest that Brho has a higher affinity for GTP than GDP, converts from the GTP-bound state into the GDP-bound state by intrinsic GTP hydrolytic activity, and returns to the GTP-bound state with the exchange of GDP with GTP. Arch.
91	NR	10721722	Neuronal Cdc2-like kinase (Nclk) is involved in the regulation of neuronal differentiation and neuro-cytoskeleton dynamics. The active kinase consists of a catalytic subunit, Cdk5, and a 25 kDa activator protein (p25nck5a) derived from a 35 kDa neuronal-specific protein (p35nck5a). As an extension of our previous study (Qi, Z., Tang, D., Zhu, X., Fujita, D.J., Wang, J.H., 1998. Association of neurofilament proteins with neuronal Cdk5 activator. J. Biol. Chem. 270, 2329-2335), which showed that neurofilament is one of the p35nck5a-associated proteins, we now report the isolation of three other novel p35nck5a-associated proteins using the yeast two-hybrid screen. The full-length forms of these three novel proteins, designated C42, C48 and C53, have a molecular mass of 66, 24, and 57 kDa, respectively. Northern analysis indicates that these novel proteins are widely expressed in human tissues, including the heart, brain, skeletal muscle, placenta, lung, liver, kidney and pancreas. The bacterially expressed glutathione S-transferase (GST)-fusion forms of these three proteins were able to co-precipitate p35nck5a complexed with Cdk5 from insect cell lysate. Among these three proteins, only C48 and C53 can be phosphorylated by Nclk, suggesting that they may be the substrates of Nclk. Sequence homology searches have suggested that the C48 protein is marginally related to restin protein, whereas the C42 protein has homologues of unknown function in Caenorhabditis elegans and Arabidopsis thaliana.
91	DR	10719179	Partial amino acid sequence of 80 kDa oxidized protein hydrolase (OPH), a serine protease present in human erythrocyte cytosol (Fujino et al., J. Biochem. 124 (1998) 1077-1085) that is adherent to oxidized erythrocyte membranes and preferentially degrades oxidatively damaged proteins (Beppu et al., Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1196 (1994) 81-87; Fujino et al., Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1374 (1998) 47-55) was determined. The N-terminal amino acid of diisopropyl fluorophosphate (DFP)-labeled OPH was suggested to be masked. Six peptide fragments of OPH obtained by digestion of DFP-labeled OPH with lysyl endopeptidase were isolated by use of reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography, and the sequence of more than eight amino acids from the N-terminal position of each peptide was determined. Results of homology search of amino acid sequence of each peptide strongly suggested that the protein was identical with human liver acylpeptide hydrolase (ACPH). OPH showed ACPH activity when N-acetyl-L-alanine p-nitroanilide and N-acetylmethionyl L-alanine were used as substrates. Glutathione S-transferase (GST)-tagged recombinant ACPH (rACPH) was prepared by use of baculovirus expression system as a 107-kDa protein from cDNA of human erythroleukemic cell line K-562. rACPH reacted with anti-OPH antiserum from rabbit. rACPH showed OPH activity when hydrogen peroxide-oxidized or glycated bovine serum albumin was used as substrates. As well as the enzyme activities of OPH, those of rACPH were inhibited by DFP. The results clearly demonstrate that ACPH, whose physiological function has not yet been well characterized, can play an important role as OPH in destroying oxidatively damaged proteins in living cells.
91	NR	10701454	A novel method for post-treatment of gene-engineered proteins is reported. A coden of Cys-His unit is introduced into the N-terminal of cecropin CMIV by using PCR. The gene is expressed in E. coli fused with GST. After purification, the fusion protein is cleaved by [Pd(en)(H2O)2]2+ at the His-Arg bond and the cecropin CMIV with antibacterial activity is obtained. The preliminary results held some promise of success for application of the palladium(II) complex as cleavage agent for the production of peptide drugs from gene-engineering fusion proteins.
91	NR	10660519	Although it is well established that Ras requires membrane localization for activation of its target molecule, Raf-1, the reason for this requirement is not fully understood. In this study, we found that modified Ras, which is purified from Sf9 cells, could activate Raf-1 in a cell-free system, when incorporated into liposome. Using a bifunctional cross-linker and a protein-fragmentation complementation assay, we detected dimer formation of Ras in the liposome and in the intact cells, respectively. These results suggest that dimerization of Ras in the lipid membrane is essential for activation of Raf-1. To support this, we found that, when fused to glutathione S-transferase (GST), unprocessed Ras expressed in Escherichia coli could bypass the requirement for liposome. A Ras-dependent Raf-1 activator, which we previously reported (Mizutani, S., Koide, H., and Kaziro, Y. (1998) Oncogene 16, 2781-2786), was still required for Raf-1 activation by GST-Ras. Furthermore, an enforced dimerization of unmodified oncogenic Ras mutant in human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 cells, using a portion of gyrase B or estrogen receptor, also resulted in activation of Raf-1. From these results, we conclude that membrane localization allows Ras to form a dimer, which is essential, although not sufficient, for Raf-1 activation.
91	DR	10648788	RNA polymerase II from the fission yeast Schizo-saccharomyces pombe consists of 12 species of subunits, Rpb1-Rpb12. We expressed these subunits, except Rpb4, simultaneously in cultured insect cells with baculovirus expression vectors. For the isolation of subunit complexes formed in the virus-infected cells, a glutathione S -transferase (GST) sequence was fused to the rpb3 cDNA to produce GST-Rpb3 fusion protein and a decahistidine-tag sequence was inserted into the rpb1 cDNA to produce Rpb1H protein. After successive affinity chromatography on glutathione and Ni(2+)columns, complexes consisting of the seven subunits, Rpb1H, Rpb2, GST-Rpb3, Rpb5, Rpb7, Rpb8 and Rpb11, were identified. Omission of the GST-Rpb3 expression resulted in reduced assembly of the Rpb11 into the complex. Direct interaction between Rpb3 and the other six subunits was detected by pairwise coexpression experiments. Coexpression of various combinations of a few subunits revealed that Rpb11 enhances Rpb3-Rpb8 interaction and consequently Rpb8 enhances Rpb1-Rpb3 interaction to some extent. We propose a mechanism in which the assembly of RNA poly-merase II is stabilized through multiple subunit-subunit contacts.
91	NR	10619853	In male Drosophila, histone H4 acetylated at Lys16 is enriched on the X chromosome, and most X-linked genes are transcribed at a higher rate than in females (thus achieving dosage compensation). Five proteins, collectively called the MSLs, are required for dosage compensation and male viability. Here we show that one of these proteins, MSL1, interacts with three others, MSL2, MSL3 and MOF. The latter is a putative histone acetyl transferase. Overexpression of either the N- or C-terminal domain of MSL1 has dominant-negative effects, i.e. causes male-specific lethality. The lethality due to expression of the N-terminal domain is reduced if msl2 is co-overexpressed. MSL2 co-purifies over a FLAG affinity column with the tagged region of MSL1, and both MSL3 and MOF co-purify with the FLAG-tagged MSL1 C-terminal domain. Furthermore, the MSL1 C-terminal domain binds specifically to a GST-MOF fusion protein and co-immunoprecipitates with HA-tagged MSL3. The MSL1 C-terminal domain shows similarity to a region of mouse CBP, a transcription co-activator. We conclude that a main role of MSL1 is to serve as the backbone for assembly of the MSL complex.
91	NR	10547281	Promoters of growth and cell cycle regulated genes frequently carry binding sites for transcription factors of the E2F and Sp1 families. We have demonstrated recently that direct interaction between Sp1 and a subgroup of the E2F factors is essential for the regulation of certain promoters. We show here that the amino acids necessary for this interaction in both cases are located within the DNA binding domain. This is in line with the assumption, that the interaction between E2F and Sp-factors contributes to promoter-specificity. Cyclin A, which binds to E2F-1 in close vicinity to Sp1 does not interfere with this interaction. Moreover we have investigated the ability of other members of the Sp1 family to interact with E2F-1 and to regulate the activity of the E2F and Sp1 dependent murine thymidine kinase promoter. All four factors of the Sp1 family are able to bind E2F-1 in co-immunoprecipitation and GST-pull down experiments. Mobility shift assays with oligonucleotides comprising the Sp1, or both the Sp1 and the E2F binding site suggest that Sp1 and Sp3 supply most if not all activity binding to the GC-box of the thymidine kinase promoter in murine fibroblasts. Reporter gene assays in Drosophila melanogaster SL2 cells and murine fibroblast 3T6 cells demonstrate that the thymidine kinase promoter is activated strongly by Sp1 and Sp3, weakly by Sp4, and not at all by Sp2. Co-expression of E2F-1 results in synergistic activation in 3T6 but not in SL2 cells.
91	NR	10506225	The cell cycle inhibitor protein p21(WAF1/Cip1) (p21) is a critical downstream effector in p53-dependent mechanisms of growth control and p53-independent pathways of terminal differentiation. We have recently reported that the transforming growth factor-beta pathway-specific Smad3 and Smad4 proteins transactivate the human p21 promoter via a short proximal region, which contains multiple binding sites for the ubiquitous transcription factor Sp1. In the present study we show that the Sp1-occupied promoter region mediates transactivation of the p21 promoter by c-Jun and the related proteins JunB, JunD, and ATF-2. By using gel electrophoretic mobility shift assays we show that this region does not contain a binding site for c-Jun. In accordance with the DNA binding data, c-Jun was unable to transactivate the p21 promoter when overexpressed in the Sp1-deficient Drosophila-derived SL2 cells. Coexpression of c-Jun and Sp1 in these cells resulted in a strong synergistic transactivation of this promoter. In addition, a chimeric promoter consisting of six tandem high affinity Sp1-binding sites fused with the CAT gene was transactivated by overexpressed c-Jun in HepG2 cells. The above data propose functional cooperation between c-Jun and Sp1. Physical interactions between the two factors were demonstrated in vitro by using GST-Sp1 hybrid proteins expressed in bacteria and in vitro transcribed-translated c-Jun. The region of c-Jun mediating interaction with Sp1 was mapped within the basic region leucine zipper domain. In vivo, functional interactions between c-Jun and Sp1 were demonstrated using a GAL4-based transactivation assay. Overexpressed c-Jun transactivated a chimeric promoter consisting of five tandem GAL4-binding sites only when coexpressed with GAL4-Sp1-(83-778) fusion proteins in HepG2 cells. By utilizing the same assay, we found that the glutamine-rich segment of the B domain of Sp1 (Bc, amino acids 424-542) was sufficient for c-Jun-induced transactivation of the p21 promoter. In conclusion, our data support a mechanism of superactivation of Sp1 by c-Jun, which is based on physical and functional interactions between these two transcription factors on the human p21 and possibly other Sp1-dependent promoters.
91	DR	10497072	The plethora of extracellular stimuli modulating the status of a cell results in the engagement of relatively few pathways responsible for transducing signals to the interior of the cell. One such pathway is the activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI-3K), which results in the generation of a membrane-restricted second messenger, polyphosphatidylinositide 3'-phosphate. Among the enzymes activated by 3'-phosphorylated inositol lipids is Akt/protein kinase B (PKB). Here we describe a protocol for the expression and one-step purification of human recombinant GST-PKB in Sf9 cells. This scheme allows generating large amounts of homogeneously purified GST-PKB with high specific activity to be employed in high-throughput screening or structural studies.
91	PR	10435591	The retroviral Gag-like protein p58gag expressed in a highly metastatic ascites rat mammary adenocarcinoma has been implicated in cell surface changes contributing to xenotransplantability. p58gag is present in the cells in a plasma membrane- and microfilament-associated signal transduction particle containing Src and is phosphorylated on tyrosine. Overlay analyses and affinity chromatography with glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion proteins of Src homology-3 (SH3) domains showed direct binding of the Src but not the Crk SH3 domain to p58gag. This association was confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation of partially purified p58gag from ascites cell lysates with platelet Src. Further, a GST-p58gag fusion protein bound full length c-Src from either platelets or c-Src-expressing insect cells. The GST-p58gag fusion protein, but not GST, was phosphorylated by platelet or insect cell-expressed c-Src, but not by a kinase negative c-Src variant. The binding of GST-p58gag to c-Src was almost completely abolished by a 50-fold excess of the GST-SH3 domain of Src, and a parallel decrease in tyrosine phosphorylation of p58gag was observed. These results demonstrate that p58gag is tyrosine-phosphorylated as a consequence of its specific association with c-Src via its SH3 domain. These observations suggest a mechanism by which Gag proteins may contribute to retroviral maturation or pathogenesis through binding and relocalization of SH3 domain-containing proteins such as Src-like tyrosine kinases to sites of association of microfilaments with the plasma membrane.
91	NR	10427035	Dipteran-specific insecticidal protein Cry4A is produced as a protoxin of 130 kDa in Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. israelensis. Here we performed the in vitro processing of Cry4A and showed that the 130-kDa protoxin of Cry4A was processed into the two protease-resistant fragments of 20 and 45 kDa through the intramolecular cleavage of a 60-kDa intermediate. The processing into these two fragments was also observed in vivo. To investigate functional properties of the two fragments, GST (glutathione S-transferase) fusion proteins of the 60-kDa intermediate and the 20- and 45-kDa fragments were constructed. Neither the GST-20-kDa fusion protein (GST-20) nor the GST-45-kDa fusion protein (GST-45) was actively toxic against mosquito larvae of Culex pipiens, whereas the GST-60-kDa intermediate fusion protein (GST-60) exhibited significant toxicity. However, when the two fusion proteins GST-20 and GST-45 coexisted, significant toxicity was observed. The coprecipitation experiment demonstrated that the two fragments associated with each other. Therefore, it is strongly suggested that the two fragments formed an active complex of apparently 60 kDa. A mutant of the 60-kDa protein which was apparently resistant to the intramolecular cleavage with the midgut extract of C. pipiens larvae had toxicity slightly lower than that of GST-60.
91	NR	10403766	The BCR gene is involved in the formation of the BCR-ABL oncogene responsible for the pathogenesis of Philadelphia chromosome-positive human leukemias. We have previously shown that P210 BCR-ABL binds to the xeroderma pigmentosum group B protein (XPB) through the portion of BCR that is homologous to the catalytic domain of GDP-GTP exchangers such as yeast CDC24 and Dbl. In the baculovirus overexpression system which facilitates binding of coexpressed proteins, we now show that XPB binds to the intact BCR protein efficiently but not to CDC24 or Dbl, suggesting specificity of this interaction. The binding of endogenous BCR and XPB proteins was also detected in Hela cells, and this was inhibited by a blocking peptide. Full-length (1-782) XPB and its truncated form (203-782), which does not contain the nuclear localization signal, were tagged with glutathione S-transferase (GST) and were expressed in Rat1 fibroblasts. GST-XPB(203-782) was localized predominantly in the cytoplasm and bound to BCR but not to p62, one of the other components in TFIIH. GST-XPB(1-782) was largely in the nucleus and bound to p62 and BCR. Although the biological significance of the binding remains to be uncovered, BCR binds to the XPB/p62 complex.
91	NR	10364319	EBNA3C can specifically repress the expression of reporter plasmids containing EBV Cp latency-associated promoter elements. Cp is normally the main promoter for EBNA mRNA initiation, so it appears that EBNA3C contributes to a negative autoregulatory control loop. By mutational analysis it was previously established that this repression is consistent with EBNA3C being targeted to Cp by binding the cellular sequence-specific DNA-binding protein CBF1 (also known as recombination signal-binding protein [RBP]-Jkappa. Further analysis suggested that in vivo a corepressor interacts with EBNA3C in this DNA binding complex. Results presented here are all consistent with a component of such a corepressor exhibiting histone deacetylase activity. The drug trichostatin A, which specifically inhibits histone deacetylases, relieved two- to threefold the repression of Cp induced by EBNA3C in two different cell types. Moreover, repression of pTK-CAT-Cp4x by EBNA3C was specifically enhanced by cotransfection of an expression plasmid for human histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC1). Consistent with these functional assays, in vitro-translated HDAC1 bound to a glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion protein including full-length EBNA3C, and in the reciprocal experiment EBNA3C bound to a GST fusion with the N terminus of HDAC1. Coimmunoprecipitations also revealed an EBNA3C-HDAC1 interaction in vivo, and GST-EBNA3C bound functional histone deacetylase enzyme activity from HeLa cell nuclear extracts. The region of EBNA3C involved in the interaction with HDAC1 appears to correspond to the region which is necessary for binding to CBF1/RBP-Jkappa. A direct physical interaction between EBNA3C and HDAC1 was demonstrated with recombinant proteins purified from bacterial cells, and we therefore conclude that HDAC1 and CBF1/RBP-Jkappa bind to the same or adjacent regions of EBNA3C. These data suggest that recruitment of histone deacetylase activity makes a significant contribution to the repression of transcription from Cp because EBNA3C bridges an interaction between CBF1/RBP-Jkappa and HDAC1.
91	NR	10361679	Silk gland elongation factor 1 (EF-1) consists of four subunits: alpha, beta, beta', and gamma. EF-1 beta beta' gamma catalyzes the exchange of GDP for GTP on EF-1 alpha and stimulates the binding of EF-1 alpha-dependent aminoacyl-tRNA to ribosomes. The carboxy-terminal regions of the EF-1 beta subunits from various species are highly conserved. We examined the region of EF-1 beta' that binds to EF-1 alpha by in vitro binding assays, and examined the GDP/GTP exchange activity using deletion mutants of a GST-EF1 beta' fusion protein. We thereby suggested a pivotal amino acid region, residues 189-222, of EF-1 beta' for binding to EF-1 alpha.
91	DR	10208437	PTEN/MMAC1 is a recently characterized tumor suppressor. A pseudogene derived from the human PTEN/MMAC1 phosphatase, psiPTEN, has been reported. Recent analysis of the pseudogene revealed conflicting results about the expression of psiPTEN. In this study, we show that the PTEN/MMAC1 pseudogene is actively transcribed in all cells and tissues examined. In some cases, pseudogene transcripts were found to represent as much as 70% of the total PTEN/MMAC1 RNA. As psiPTEN is transcribed, there is a potential for misinterpretation of PTEN/MMAC1 mutations when RT-PCR techniques are used, as well as potential for a psiPTEN-encoded translation product. Although we were unable to detect a pseudogene protein product in the cell lines examined, a baculovirus produced GST pseudogene fusion protein exhibited phosphatase activity comparable to wild type. The results of this study, taken together, indicate the potential complication of PTEN/MMAC1 molecular analysis caused by the expression of psiPTEN.
91	DR	10191203	The development of reliable, sensitive, and specific serological methods for the detection of human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8) antibodies is critical for a thorough understanding of HHV-8 prevalence and pathogenesis. To evaluate the potential usefulness of HHV-8 proteins in measuring the responses against both latent and lytic antigens, we selected 1 latent [open reading frame (ORF) 73] antigen and 3 HHV-8 lytic antigens (ORFs 65, K8.1A, and K8.1B) previously identified as immunogenic [Virology (1998) 243, 208-217]. Full-length genomic ORF 73 and full-length ORFs 65, K8.1A, and K8.1B from the cDNA clones were cloned, expressed in bacterial and baculovirus-insect cell expression systems, and purified as GST fusion proteins. These recombinant proteins were used in Western blot reactions to test sera from 104 human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)+/Kaposi's sarcoma (KS)+ homosexual men, 77 HIV+/KS- homosexual men, and 84 age-matched HIV-/KS- men. These sera were also tested in immunofluorescence assays (IFAs) with uninduced and 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-induced B cell lymphoma-1 cells to detect antibodies against latency-associated nuclear antigens (LANA) and antibodies against lytic antigens (cytoplasmic fluorescence). These sera exhibited differential reactivities reflecting different titers of antibodies against HHV-8 proteins, and variable reactivities were seen more commonly with the sera from HIV-/KS- adult men. In the Western blot assay, 89% (93 of 104) of HIV+/KS + sera, 60% (46 of 77) of HIV+/KS- sera, and 7% (6 of 84) HIV+/KS- sera were reactive with both latent and lytic recombinant antigens. Western blot reactions with ORF 73 protein were more sensitive than LANA-IFA results. The lytic IFA and lytic Western blot (ORFs 65 and K8.1A) assays were more sensitive than the ORF 73 Western blots and LANA-IFA. With an exception of 2 sera from the HIV-/KS- group, all sera positive for lytic IFA antibodies and ORF 65 and K8.1A antibodies were also positive for latent antibodies. With few exceptions, sera positive for ORF 65 antibodies were also positive for K8.1A antibodies, and sera recognized the K8.1A protein more often than the K8.1B protein. There is a high degree of concordance between IFA and Western blot reactions, suggesting that this panel of HHV-8 recombinant proteins could detect a majority of the HHV-8-seropositive individuals. These results suggest that IFA followed by confirmation with the Western blot reactions with a panel of latent and lytic immunogenic antigens would provide a reliable, sensitive, and specific method for the detection of HHV-8 antibodies.
91	DR	10092875	mRNA from human polymorphonuclear neutrophil leucocytes (PMNs) was probed with cDNA encoding human skeletal muscle arginine-specific ADP-ribosyltransferase (ART1). A single 2.6-kb transcript was identified, which was similar in size to that observed in human skeletal muscle RNA. An 872-bp cDNA fragment, corresponding to the amino acid sequence of the processed human skeletal muscle enzyme, was generated by reverse transcription-PCR amplification of RNA from human PMNs, and was found to be identical to the ART1 cDNA derived from human skeletal muscle. ART1 was expressed as a fusion protein with glutathione S-transferase (GST) in insect cells, and antibodies were raised against the fusion protein in a rabbit. Following removal of GST immunoreactivity by immunoprecipitation, these antibodies were used to measure the abundance of immunoreactive ART1 on the surface of PMNs. Exposure of PMNs to formyl-Met-Leu-Phe (FMLP) was followed by a rapid increase in the abundance of cell surface ART1 (T1/2 = 1.9 min), and the concentration of FMLP for half-maximum response was 28.6 nM. Similar responses were observed after exposure of the cells to platelet-activating factor or interleukin-8, and we conclude that some of the effects of these chemotaxins are mediated by translocation of an intracellular pool of ART1 to its site of catalytic activity on the outer aspect of the plasma membrane.
91	DR	10091999	The envelope of hepatitis B virus (HBV) consists of three related proteins known as the large (L), middle (M) and small (S) hepatitis B surface antigens (HBsAg). L-HBsAg has a 108-119 amino acid extension at the N terminus compared with M-HBsAg and contains the preS1 sequence of the HBV envelope. Previous research has identified this region as the likely virus attachment protein which is thought to interact with the cellular receptor for the virus. However, as the receptor has still not been identified unequivocally, we used the preS1 region of L-HBsAg to screen a human liver cDNA library by the yeast two-hybrid system. Several positive clones were isolated which encoded cellular proteins that interacted with the HBV preS1 protein. The specificity was examined in an independent manner in experiments in which baculovirus-derived glutathione S-transferase (GST)-preS1 was incubated with 35S-labelled protein expressed by in vitro translation from the positive clones. The intensity of the interactions using this alternative approach mirrored those observed in the yeast two-hybrid system and two proteins (an unidentified protein and a mitochondrial protein) were selected for further study. The specificity of the binding reaction between the preS1 protein and these two proteins was further confirmed in a competition assay; HBV purified from serum, but not purified HBsAg, was able to compete with preS1 and thus block GST-preS1 binding to the unidentified protein but not to the mitochondrial protein. The unidentified protein was then expressed as a fusion protein with GST and this was able to bind HBV virions in a direct manner.
91	NR	10075822	We have developed a quantitative scintillation proximity assay (SPA) that reproduces the Raf/MEK/ERK signal transduction pathway. The components of this assay include human cRaf1, MEK1, and ERK2 and a biotinylated peptide substrate for ERK2. cRaf1 was expressed as a his-tagged protein in insect cells in an active form. MEK1 and ERK2 were expressed in Escherichia coli as glutathione S-transferase (GST)-fusion proteins in their inactive forms. ERK2 was removed from the GST portion of the fusion protein by cleavage with thrombin protease. When the purified components are incubated together, cRaf-1 phosphorylates and activates MEK1, MEK1 phosphorylates and activates ERK2, and ERK2 phosphorylates the peptide, biotin-AAATGPLSPGPFA. Phosphorylation of the peptide using [gamma-33P]ATP is detected following binding to streptavidin-coated SPA beads. The assay detects inhibitors of cRaf1, MEK1, or ERK2, and has been used to screen large numbers of compounds. The specific target of inhibition was subsequently identified with secondary assays described herein.
91	NR	10329473	Drosophila melanogaster casein kinase II (DmCKII) is composed of catalytic alpha and regulatory beta subunits associated as an alpha2beta2 heterotetramer. Using the two-hybrid system, we have screened a Drosophila embryo cDNA library for proteins that interact with DmCKII alpha. One of the cDNAs encodes a novel beta-like polypeptide, which we designate beta'. In situ hybridization localizes the corresponding gene to 56F1-2, a site distinct from that of both the beta gene and the Stellate family of beta-like sequences. The predicted sequence of beta' is more closely related to the beta subunit of Drosophila and other metazoans than to the Stellate family of proteins, suggesting that it is a second regulatory subunit. In vitro reconstitution studies show that a GST-beta' fusion protein associates with the alpha subunit to generate a tetrameric complex with regulatory properties similar to those of the native alpha2beta2 holoenzyme. The data are consistent with the proposed role of the beta' subunit as an integral component of the holoenzyme.
91	DR	10024467	We describe the construction of expression vectors based on three of the most frequently used gene fusion affinity tags [glutathione S-transferase (GST), maltose binding protein (MBP), and the His6 peptide]. The polylinkers of pGEX4T1, pMal-c2, and a pET vector were replaced with the polylinker isolated from the baculovirus expression plasmid pFastBac. Once appropriate restriction sites have been introduced into a gene, it can be fused to all three affinity tags with little effort, allowing expression-screening experiments to be performed efficiently. We discuss the development and use of these vectors with respect to overcoming purification problems encountered for the RhoA GDP/GTP nucleotide dissociation inhibitor (RhoGDI) and their advantages over commercially available expression vectors.
91	PR	9926939	We have previously shown that Sp1-mediated transcription is stimulated by Rb and repressed by cyclin D1. The stimulation of Sp1 transcriptional activity by Rb is conferred, in part, through a direct interaction with the TBP-associated factor TAF(II)250. Here we investigated the mechanism(s) through which cyclin D1 represses Sp1. We examined the ability of cyclin D1 to regulate transcription mediated by Gal4-Sp1 fusion proteins, which contain the Gal4 DNA-binding domain and Sp1 trans-activation domain(s). The domain of Sp1 sufficient to confer repression by cyclin D1 was mapped to a region important for interaction with TAF(II)110. We further demonstrate that TAF(II)250-cyclin D1 complexes can be immunoprecipitated from mammalian and baculovirus-infected insect cells and that recombinant GST-TAF(II)250 (amino acids 1-434) associates with cyclin D1 in vitro. Moreover, the overexpression of Rb or CDK4 reduced the level of TAF(II)250-cyclin D1 complex. The amino terminus of cyclin D1 (amino acids 1-100) was sufficient for association with TAF(II)250 and for repressing Sp1-mediated transcription. Taken together, the results suggest that cyclin D1 may regulate transcription by interacting directly or indirectly with TAF(II)250.
91	NR	9920818	The Bax gene is a member of the Bcl2 family that functions to regulate the programmed cell death process. A number of Bax isoforms have been previously identified: alpha, beta, gamma, delta, and omega. Here we report the identification and characterization of an additional Bax variant, termed Baxepsilon. The newly identified Bax variant contains a 97-base insertion generated by alternative splicing which includes a previously unidentified exon between exons 4 and 5. The insertion causes the production of a truncated Bax protein, termed Baxepsilon, which encodes a protein of 164 residues with a calculated molecular weight of 18 kDa. The last 69 amino acids of Baxalpha that encompass the BH2 and the TM domains are missing in Baxepsilon. The Baxepsilon protein, when expressed as a GST fusion protein, associated efficiently with Baxalpha, Baxepsilon, Bcl2, and Bcl-xL. In addition, Baxepsilon was active in inducing apoptosis when tested in a transient transfection assay. Furthermore, the presence of antiapoptotic genes including Bcl2, Bcl-xL, and baculovirus p35 abrogated Baxepsilon and Baxalpha function. Although the newly identified Bax variant was detectable by RT-PCR in several normal mouse tissues, the role of this variant in controlling programmed cell death is currently unknown.
91	NR	9882337	Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) glycoprotein gI is a type 1 transmembrane glycoprotein which is one component of the heterodimeric gE:gI Fc receptor complex. Like VZV gE, VZV gI was phosphorylated in both VZV-infected cells and gI-transfected cells. Preliminary studies demonstrated that a serine 343-proline 344 sequence located within the gI cytoplasmic tail was the most likely phosphorylation site. To determine which protein kinase catalyzed the gI phosphorylation event, we constructed a fusion protein, consisting of glutathione-S-transferase (GST) and the gI cytoplasmic tail, called GST-gI-wt. When this fusion protein was used as a substrate for gI phosphorylation in vitro, the results demonstrated that GST-gI-wt fusion protein was phosphorylated by a representative cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) called P-TEFb, a homologue of CDK1 (cdc2). When serine 343 within the serine-proline phosphorylation site was replaced with an alanine residue, the level of phosphorylation of the gI fusion protein was greatly reduced. Subsequent experiments with individually immunoprecipitated mammalian CDKs revealed that the VZV gI fusion protein was phosphorylated best by CDK1, to a lesser degree by CDK2, and not at all by CDK6. Transient-transfection assays carried out in the presence of the specific CDK inhibitor roscovitine strongly supported the prior results by demonstrating a marked decrease in gI phosphorylation while gI protein expression was unaffected. Finally, the possibility that VZV gI contained a CDK phosphorylation site in its endodomain was of further interest because its partner, gE, contains a casein kinase II phosphorylation site in its endodomain; prior studies have established that CDK1 can phosphorylate casein kinase II.
91	NR	9836423	From a brain cDNA library of Bombyx mori, we cloned cDNA for BRab, which encoded a 202-amino-acid polypeptide sharing 60-80% similarity with rab1 family members. To characterize its biochemical properties, cDNA for BRab was inserted into an expression vector (pGEX2T) and expressed in Escherichia coli as a glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion protein. The recombinant protein was purified to homogeneity with glutathione S-Sepharose. The purified GST-BRab bound [35S]-GTP gamma S and [3H]-GDP with association constants of 1.5 x 10(6) M-1 and 0.58 x 10(6) M-1, respectively. The binding of [35S]-GTP gamma S was inhibited with GTP and GDP, but with no other nucleotides. The GTP-hydrolysis activity was evaluated to be 5 m mole/min/mole of BRab. In the presence of 6 mM MgCl2, bound [35S]-GTP gamma S and [3H]-GDP were exchanged with GTP gamma S most efficiently. These results suggest that BRab, having a higher affinity for GTP than GDP, converts from the GTP-bound state into the GDP-bound state by intrinsic GTP hydrolysis activity and returns to the GTP-bound state with the exchange of GDP with GTP.
91	DR	9813208	GST-NS1 purified from Escherichia coli and insect cells binds double-strand DNA in an (ACCA)2-3-dependent fashion under similar ionic conditions, independent of the presence of anti-NS1 antisera or exogenously supplied ATP and interacts with single-strand DNA and RNA in a sequence-independent manner. An amino-terminal domain (amino acids 1-275) of NS1 [GST-NS1(1-275)], representing 41% of the full-length NS1 molecule, includes a domain that binds double-strand DNA in a sequence-specific manner at levels comparable to full-length GST-NS1, as well as single-strand DNA and RNA in a sequence-independent manner. The deletion of 15 additional amino-terminal amino acids yielded a molecule [GST-NS1(1-275)] that maintained (ACCA)2-3-specific double-strand DNA binding; however, this molecule was more sensitive to increasing ionic conditions than full-length GST-NS1 and GST-NS1(1-275) and could not be demonstrated to bind single-strand nucleic acids. A quantitative filter binding assay showed that E. coli- and baculovirus-expressed GST-NS1 and E. coli GST-NS1(1-275) specifically bound double-strand DNA with similar equilibrium kinetics [as measured by their apparent equilibrium DNA binding constants (KD)], whereas GST-NS1(16-275) bound 4- to 8-fold less well.
91	NR	9793644	The reduction of the tetrazolium salt 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT) to a blue formazan product is widely used for assaying cell survival and proliferation. The reduction reaction is catalyzed by dehydrogenases localized in the mitochondria of viable cells. As part of an analysis of the ability of glutathione S-transferase (GST) enzymes to protect cells from electrophilic compounds, we found extremely high background levels of the formazan product produced by cells that overexpressed the mouse GST P1-1 enzyme. Further analysis with purified GST enzymes confirmed the ability of these enzymes to reduce MTT in vitro. These data suggest that cytotoxicity assays using MTT should be interpreted with caution, especially when studying the effects of compounds that can influence GST expression.
91	PR	9792713	Signaling through the insulin receptor tyrosine kinase involves its autophosphorylation in response to insulin and the subsequent tyrosine phosphorylation of substrate proteins such as insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1). In basal 3T3-L1 adipocytes, IRS-1 is predominantly membrane-bound, and this localization may be important in targeting downstream signaling elements that mediate insulin action. Since IRS-1 localization to membranes may occur through its association with specific membrane proteins, a 3T3-F442A adipocyte cDNA expression library was screened with non-tyrosine-phosphorylated, baculovirus-expressed IRS-1 in order to identify potential IRS-1 receptors. A cDNA clone that encodes sigma3A, a small subunit of the AP-3 adaptor protein complex, was demonstrated to bind IRS-1 utilizing this cloning strategy. The specific interaction between IRS-1 and sigma3A was further verified by in vitro binding studies employing baculovirus-expressed IRS-1 and a glutathione S-transferase (GST)-sigma3A fusion protein. IRS-1 and sigma3A were found to co-fractionate in a detergent-resistant population of low density membranes isolated from basal 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Importantly, the addition of exogenous purified GST-sigma3A to low density membranes caused the release of virtually all of the IRS-1 bound to these membranes, while GST alone had no effect. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that sigma3A serves as an IRS-1 receptor that may dictate the subcellular localization and the signaling functions of IRS-1.
91	NR	9790883	The steroid hormone 20-hydroxyecdysone (20E) plays a key role in the induction and modulation of morphogenetic events throughout Drosophila melanogaster development. Two members of the nuclear receptor superfamily, the product of the EcR (EcR) and of the ultraspiracle genes (Usp), heterodimerize to form its functional receptor. To study the receptor-DNA interaction, critical for regulating 20E-dependent gene expression, it is necessary to produce large quantities of EcR and Usp DNA-binding domains. Toward this end DNA-binding domains of EcR and Usp (EcRDBD and UspDBD, respectively) were cloned and expressed in Escherichia coli as fusion proteins with glutathione S-transferase (GST). However, the results of DNA-binding studies obtained with purified GST-DBDs were found to be questionable because the fused proteins oligomerized in solution due to the presence of GST. Therefore DBDs were released from GST-chimeric proteins by thrombin cleavage and then purified by glutathione-Sepharose 4B chromatography and by gel filtration on Superdex 75 HR. The gel mobility-shift experiments showed that UspDBD exhibited higher affinity than EcRDBD toward a 20-hydroxyecdysone response element from the Drosophila hsp 27 gene (hsp 27pal). Furthermore, formation of the heterodimeric EcRDBD-UspDBD complex was observed to be synergistic when equimolar mixture of both DBDs was incubated with hsp 27pal. Surprisingly, GST-EcRDBD bound hsp 27pal with higher affinity than GST-UspDBD. This difference was accompanied by the impaired ability of the GST-DBDs to interact synergistically with hsp 27pal. This is the first report on expression and purification of the soluble DBDs of the functional ecdysteroid receptor with satisfying yields. Furthermore, our results add to the recent findings which indicate the need for caution in interpreting the activities of GST fusion proteins.
91	DR	9725668	We have expressed the E1 protein of Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) in a new recombinant form by using a baculovirus transfer vector directing the expression of proteins fused to the carboxy-terminus of glutathione-S-transferase (GST). The E1 domain was expressed varying at its carboxy terminus in order to retain (GST-E1) or delete (GST-E1b) the C-terminal hydrophobic region that may be involved in membrane association. Following infection with the recombinant virus, GST-E1b was efficiently secreted into the culture media and could be purified in a single step with the minimum of denaturation by glutathione affinity chromatography. The purified product was specifically immunoprecipitated by HCV positive human sera suggesting the maintenance of an immuno-relevant tertiary structure despite removal of the hydrophobic anchor. By contrast, cells infected with a recombinant baculovirus expressing GST-E1 gave a fusion protein with an appropriate molecular weight but also a series of polypeptides of lower molecular weight consistent with cleavage at the C-terminus of E1. GST-E1 was not secreted into the medium and was associated predominantly with the membrane fraction following cell disruption; the lower molecular weight forms were soluble and secreted.
91	NR	9722879	The 3'-proximal open reading frames (ORFs) of beet yellows closterovirus, California isolate (BYV-CA), were sequenced and the expression of the corresponding proteins analyzed. The nucleotide sequence of ORF 5 (coding for p24) was most conserved compared with ORF 7 (coding for p20) and ORF 8 (coding for p21) among the isolates analyzed. Polyclonal antisera were produced to GST fusion proteins of p24, p20, and p21. Accumulation of p24, CP, p20 and p21 was studied in infected Tetragonia expansa plants and Chenopodium quinoa protoplasts. All four proteins were expressed in all tissues (old leaves, young leaves and stems), and most abundantly in young leaves. The subcellular localization of each protein in different tissues showed that compared with p24, CP and p21, p20 accumulated less in transfected protoplasts. Immunogold labeling in sugarbeet with p24 and CP antisera demonstrated co-localization of p24 and CP in vascular petiole tissues. In infectivity neutralization tests, antisera against p24 and CP greatly reduced transmission of BYV by viruliferous aphids compared with viruliferous aphids fed on preimmune serum or antiserum to p21.
91	PR	9712832	pp120, a substrate of the insulin receptor tyrosine kinase, is a plasma membrane glycoprotein that is expressed in the hepatocyte as two spliced isoforms differing by the presence (full-length) or absence (truncated) of most of the intracellular domain including all phosphorylation sites. Co-expression of full-length pp120, but not its phosphorylation-defective isoforms, increased receptor-mediated insulin endocytosis and degradation in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts. We, herein, examined whether internalization of pp120 is required to mediate its effect on insulin endocytosis. The amount of full-length pp120 expressed at the cell surface membrane, as measured by biotin labeling, markedly decreased in response to insulin only when insulin receptors were co-expressed. In contrast, when phosphorylation-defective pp120 mutants were co-expressed, the amount of pp120 expressed at the cell surface did not decrease in response to insulin. Indirect immunofluorescence analysis revealed that upon insulin treatment of cells co-expressing insulin receptors, full-length, but not truncated, pp120 co-localized with alpha-adaptin in the adaptor protein complex that anchors endocytosed proteins to clathrin-coated pits. This suggests that full-length pp120 is part of a complex of proteins required for receptor-mediated insulin endocytosis and that formation of this complex is regulated by insulin-induced pp120 phosphorylation by the receptor tyrosine kinase. In vitro GST binding assays and co-immunoprecipitation experiments in intact cells further revealed that pp120 did not bind directly to the insulin receptor and that its association with the receptor may be mediated by other cellular proteins.
91	NR	9709025	The cDNA coding for the mature hypodermin C from first instars of Hypoderma lineatum was cloned by reverse transcription and PCR amplification of total larval RNA using specific oligonucleotide primers. This cDNA was expressed in Escherichia coli as a glutathione S-transferase fusion protein. Mature hypodermin C was released from the GST-fusion after glutathione-Sepharose 4B affinity chromatography and proteolytic cleavage using factor Xa. The purified recombinant protein showed enzymatic activity in gelatin-polyacrylamide gels and when azocoll was used as substrate. An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was developed using the recombinant antigen. Positive/negative cutoff values were calculated using the mean OD percentage (1.74%) of 113 negative sera plus three standard deviations. Sensitivity and specificity according to the resulting cutoff (10.74%) were 85 and 98.2% respectively.
91	DR	9664300	NA
91	DR	9636281	We describe the development of the baculovirus Autographa californica nuclear polyhedrosis virus (AcNPV) as a vector for the display of distinct proteins on the viral surface in a manner that is analogous to the established bacterial "phage display" systems. As a model system, the marker gene encoding the 26kDa protein glutathione-S-transferase (GST) was used to construct several fusions with the major baculovirus glycoprotein gp64 gene. Following expression in Spodoptera frugiperda (Sf9) cells, the yield and cellular distribution of each GST-gp64 protein was assessed by Western blot of both cell and supernatant fractions. One fusion, in which GST was inserted between the leader peptide and the nature protein, was found to be efficiently secreted into the cell medium. In the context of expression of the full length gp64, the hybrid GST-gp64 was shown by immunogold labelling to be incorporated onto the virion surface. In addition, the affinity purification of the soluble transmembrane gp64-GST fusion protein resulted in the co-purification of wild type gp64 suggesting that co-oligomerization of the GST-tagged fusion and the wild type molecule was the basis for virion incorporation. The HIV major surface glycoprotein, gp120 was also efficiently displayed in functional form on the viral surface following fusion to the amino terminus of gp64. A general expression vector, pAcSurf-2, was constructed in which multiple cloning sites were positioned in-phase between the gp64 signal sequence and the sequence encoding the mature protein under the control of the polyhedrin promoter.
91	DR	9632740	Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) mediates many functions of the central and peripheral nervous systems by its interaction with specific neuronal and glial receptors. Fourteen serotonin receptors belonging to seven families have been identified through physiological, pharmacological, and molecular cloning studies. Monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) specific for each of these receptor subtypes are needed to characterize their expression, distribution, and function in embryonic, adult, and pathological tissues. In this article we report the development and characterization of MAbs specific to the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor. To generate MAbs against 5-HT2AR, mice were immunized with the N-terminal domain of the receptor. The antigens were produced as glutathionine S-transferase (GST) fusion proteins in insect cells using a Baculovirus expression system. The hybridomas were initially screened by ELISA against the GST-5-HT2AR recombinant proteins and subsequently against GST control proteins to eliminate clones with unwanted reactivity. They were further tested by Western blotting against recombinant GST-5-HT2AR, rat and human brain lysate, and lysate from cell lines transfected with 5-HT2AR cDNA. One of the MAbs G186-1117, which recognizes a portion of the 5-HT2AR N-terminus, was selected for further characterization. G186-1117 reacted with a band of molecular size 55 kD corresponding to the predicted size of 5-HT2AR in lysates from rat brain and a 5-HT2AR-transfected cell line. Its specificity was further confirmed by adsorption of immunoreactivity with recombinant 5-HT2AR but not with recombinant 5-HT2BR and 5-HT2CR. Rat brain sections and Schwann cell cultures were immunohistochemically labeled with this MAb. G186-1117 showed differential staining in various regions of the rat brain, varying from regions with no staining to regions of intense reactivity. In particular, staining of cell bodies and dendrites of the pyramidal neurons in the cortex was observed, which is in agreement with observations of electrophysiological studies.
91	NR	9538263	To characterize in more detail the cathepsin L-like cysteine proteinases from Sitophilus zeamais (SCPs) cloned in our previous study [Matsumoto et al. (1997) J. Biochem. 121, 464-476], we established a system for their functional expression and purification using a glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion gene vector from Escherichia coli. The proenzyme forms of two representative SCPs, proSCPc1 and proSCPg3, were expressed as GST-fusion proteins and purified on a glutathione Sepharose column. GST-proSCPc1 undergoes autoproteolytic cleavage into the mature form efficiently at acidic pH, and exhibits significant proteolytic activity toward various substrates including hemoglobin and Z-Phe-Arg-MCA. The enzymatic characteristics of the activated form of SCPc1 are similar to those of mammalian cathepsin L, but its pH optimum for the hydrolysis of hemoglobin is significantly lower. The other proSCP, GST-proSCPg3, which has a shorter COOH-terminal domain than SCPc1, undergoes almost no autolytic processing and shows only very slight proteolytic activity, although the other enzymatic characteristics of GST-proSCPg3 are similar to those of GST-proSCPc1.
91	NR	9574564	A snake venom-like protease isolated by a differential display screen between normal and osteoarthritis (OA)-affected cartilage (designated as cSVP) has a cDNA sequence identical to TNF-alpha convertase enzyme (TACE). TACE shows the presence of an unknown prodomain, a cysteine switch, a catalytic domain, a zinc binding region, a disintegrin region, an EGF-like domain, a transmembrane domain, and a unique cytoplasmic region. A TACE construct harboring the signal + prodomain + catalytic region (TACE-SPCdeltaDETCy), expressed in baculovirus could cleave preferentially (approximately 12-fold) the TNF-specific peptide over the matrix metalloproteases peptide in vitro. This recombinant protein also cleaved the natural substrate GST-ProTNF-alpha to TNF-alpha (17 kDa) in vitro. The mRNA for TACE, which is broadly distributed and differentially expressed in a variety of human tissues, is up-regulated in arthritis-affected cartilage, but not normal cartilage. OA-affected cartilage also expressed TNF-alpha mRNA that was not detected in normal cartilage. The OA-affected cartilage (in explant assays) spontaneously released TNF-alpha and IL-8 in ex vivo conditions. Addition of TNF-alphaR fused to IgG Fc fragment (TNF-alphaR:Fc) in the presence or absence of soluble IL-1R (with which it acted additively) significantly attenuated the spontaneous/autocrine release of articular IL-8 in this assay. These experiments demonstrate a functional paracrine/autocrine role of TNF-alpha in OA-affected cartilage that may depend, in part, on up-regulated levels of chondrocyte-derived TACE.
91	NR	9536439	Drosophila indirect flight muscles (IFMs) contain a 35 kDa protein which cross-reacts with antibodies to the IFM specific protein troponin-H isoform 34 (TnH-34). Peptide fingerprinting and peptide sequencing showed that this 35 kDa protein is glutathione S-transferase-2 (GST-2). GST-2 is present in the asynchronous indirect flight muscles but not in the synchronous tergal depressor of the trochanter (jump muscle). Genetic dissection of the sarcomere showed that GST-2 is stably associated with the thin filaments but the presence of myosin is required to achieve the correct stoichiometry, suggesting that there is also an interaction with the thick filament. The two Drosophila TnHs (isoforms 33 and 34) are naturally occurring fusion proteins in which a proline-rich extension of approximately 250 amino acids replaces the 27 C-terminal residues of the muscle-specific tropomyosin II isoform. The proteolytic enzyme, Igase, cleaves the hydrophobic C-terminal sequence of TnH-34 at three sites and TnH-33 at one site. This results in the release of GST-2 from the myofibril. The amount of GST-2 stably bound to the myofibril is directly proportional to the total amount of undigested TnH. It is concluded that GST-2 in the thin filament is stabilized there by interaction with TnH. We speculate that the hydrophobic N-terminal region of GST-2 interacts with the hydrophobic C-terminal extension of TnH, and that both are close to a myosin cross-bridge.
91	PR	9488453	We propose a novel model for the regulation of the p85/pl10alpha phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase. In insect cells, the p110alpha catalytic subunit is active as a monomer but its activity is decreased by coexpression with the p85 regulatory subunit. Similarly, the lipid kinase activity of recombinant glutathione S-transferase (GST)-p110alpha is reduced by 65 to 85% upon in vitro reconstitution with p85. Incubation of p110alpha/p85 dimers with phosphotyrosyl peptides restored activity, but only to the level of monomeric p110alpha. These data show that the binding of phosphoproteins to the SH2 domains of p85 activates the p85/p110alpha dimers by inducing a transition from an inhibited to a disinhibited state. In contrast, monomeric p110 had little activity in HEK 293T cells, and its activity was increased 15- to 20-fold by coexpression with p85. However, this apparent requirement for p85 was eliminated by the addition of a bulky tag to the N terminus of p110alpha or by the growth of the HEK 293T cells at 30 degrees C. These nonspecific interventions mimicked the effects of p85 on p110alpha, suggesting that the regulatory subunit acts by stabilizing the overall conformation of the catalytic subunit rather than by inducing a specific activated conformation. This stabilization was directly demonstrated in metabolically labeled HEK 293T cells, in which p85 increased the half-life of p110. Furthermore, p85 protected p110 from thermal inactivation in vitro. Importantly, when we examined the effect of p85 on GST-p110alpha in mammalian cells at 30 degrees C, culture conditions that stabilize the catalytic subunit and that are similar to the conditions used for insect cells, we found that p85 inhibited p110alpha. Thus, we have experimentally distinguished two effects of p85 on p110alpha: conformational stabilization of the catalytic subunit and inhibition of its lipid kinase activity. Our data reconcile the apparent conflict between previous studies of insect versus mammalian cells and show that p110alpha is both stabilized and inhibited by dimerization with p85.
91	PR	9454723	Interactions between the herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) origin (ori)-binding protein (UL9) and two other components of the functional DNA replication complex have been observed. However, to date, no interaction between UL9 and a component of the DNA polymerase holoenzyme has been demonstrated. In this report, we demonstrate that UL9 and the DNA polymerase accessory protein (UL42) can form a stable complex in vitro as determined by coimmunoprecipitation with specific antibodies to each protein and by affinity chromatography using glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion proteins. Complex formation does not require the presence of other viral proteins and occurs in the presence of ethidium bromide, indicating that UL9-UL42 interaction is DNA independent. Affinity beads charged with increasing concentrations of GST-42 fusion protein up to 5 microM bound increasing amounts of UL9 expressed by in vitro transcription/translation in rabbit reticulocyte lysates. Binding of N- and C-terminal portions of UL9 to GST affinity matrices revealed that the N-terminal 533 amino acids were sufficient for binding to GST-42, albeit at approximately a four- to six-fold reduced affinity compared to the full-length protein. No binding of a polypeptide containing the remainder of the UL9 C-terminal residues was observed. Thus the ori-binding protein, UL9, can physically associate with at least one member of each of the complexes (helicase/primase, DNA polymerase holoenzyme, single-stranded DNA-binding protein) required for origin-dependent DNA replication. These specific interactions provide a means by which the ordered assembly of HSV-1 DNA replication proteins at origins of replication can occur in the infected cell for initiation of viral DNA synthesis.
91	NR	9349710	In most metazoans, the glutathione S-transferases (GST) are encoded by gene families, and are used to detoxify xenobiotics. We describe the structure of genomic loci coding for the GSTs in the housefly that have been implicated, by both genetic and biochemical means, in mediating insecticide resistance. In earlier work, we showed that one of the theta-class enzymes, MdGST-3, is overproduced in resistant flies and degrades certain insecticides. We used a fragment from a cDNA clone of MdGST-3 as a probe to screen a housefly genomic DNA bank in phage lambda. This probe detected multiple gst loci. Genes for GSTs were found in five different, nonoverlapping lambda clones, three of which carry multiple, closely linked gsts. Multiple genes for both MdGST-3 and MdGST-4 were found; some of which have introns in their 5' untranslated regions. In adults, the only MdGST-3 enzymes that are expressed are encoded by the intron-free genes. A new theta-class GST (called MdGST-5) was also discovered. Fusion genes comprising 5' MdGST-3 sequences and either MdGST-4 or MdGST-5 sequences in their 3' halves were encountered at three separate loci. The genes described here are found in both the ancestral sensitive strain and the insecticide-resistant strains.
91	PR	9448714	The kinetic mechanism of the trk receptor-linked tyrosine kinase was determined using a baculovirus expressed trk kinase domain and a bacterially expressed phospholipase C-gamma/glutathione S-transferase (PLC-gamma/ GST) fusion protein as substrate. Product and dead-end inhibition studies indicate an ordered association of substrates to trkA kinase with the nucleotide ATP binding prior to the exogenous substrate PLC-gamma/GST, followed by release of the phosphorylated PLC-gamma/GST product prior to release of ADP (sequential ordered bi-bi mechanism). This is in contrast to the reported kinetic mechanisms of closely related EGF receptor and insulin receptor kinases which appear to proceed via a rapid equilibrium random mechanism. The indolocarbazole K-252a, which was previously shown to be a potent and relatively selective inhibitor of trk kinase activity, acts as a competitive inhibitor with respect to ATP. The data suggest that potent and selective kinase inhibitors can be rationally designed by exploring subtle variations surrounding the nucleotide binding sites of receptor tyrosine kinases.
91	PR	9438387	FKBP65 is a member of the FK506-binding protein class of immunophilins and is the only member reported to contain four peptidylprolyl cis-trans isomerase domains and an unrelated COOH-terminal domain. In this report, we show that the heat shock protein hsp90 and the serine/threonine protein kinase c-Raf-1 are components of FKBP65 immune complexes. The NH2-terminal regulatory domain of c-Raf-1 appears to be required for its interaction with FKBP65. Using GST-FKBP65 fusion protein and purified Raf proteins, we show that full-length FKBP65 can interact with c-Raf-1 but not B-Raf. The activation kinetics of c-Raf-1 after v-H-RasV12 injection of Xenopus oocytes appear to correlate with FKBP65/c-Raf-1 interaction, suggesting that FKBP65 may preferentially associate with forms of c-Raf-1 that are more posttranslationally modified. The interaction of FKBP65 with the c-Raf-heat shock protein 90 heterocomplex implicates this immunophilin in signal-transduction processes.
91	NR	9399593	Drosophila calpain (Dm-calpain) produced in Escherichia coli has a distinct Ca2+-dependent activity. By using a recombinant Dm-calpain, we searched for its substrates occurring in Drosophila ovaries, where Dm-calpain is expressed. Among a number of major proteins, several proteins in a salt-extracted fraction were selectively degraded by Dm-calpain in a Ca2+-dependent manner. The major substrates were identified by microsequencing the lysylendopeptidase-digested proteins. Three ribosomal proteins, the L5, L7, and L8 subunits of the 60S ribosome, were found to be potential Dm-calpain substrates. In addition, the alpha subunit of elongation factor-1 (EF-1alpha), a multi-functional protein involved in both protein synthesis and cytoskeletal regulation, was shown to be cleaved by Dm-calpain into several distinct fragments when expressed as a GST-fusion protein. Endogenous EF-1alpha in ovary extracts was also shown by western blot analysis to be similarly degraded. These observations suggest that Dm-calpain may regulate protein synthesis and cytoskeletal structure through its degradative or processing activity.
91	DR	9366090	A gene expression system using recombinant Autographa california nuclear polyhedrosis virus (baculovirus) and Sf-9 cells has been scaled up to the 10-L tank level and shown to be capable of producing herpes simplex virus (HSV) protease in serum-free media. High densities of Spodoptera frugiperda (Sf-9) cells were achieved by modifying two 10-L Biolafitte fermenters specifically for insect cell growth. The existing Rushton impellers were replaced by marine impellers to reduce shear and the aeration system was modified to allow external addition of air/O2 mixtures at low flow rates through either the sparge line or into the head space of the fermenter. To inoculate the tanks, Sf-9 cells were adapted to grow to high cell densities (6-10 x 10(6) cells ml-1) in shake flasks in serum-free media. With these procedures, cell densities of 5 x 10(6) cells ml-1 were routinely achieved in the 10-L tanks. These cells were readily infected with recombinant baculovirus expressing the 247-amino acid catalytic domain of the HSV-1 strain 17 protease UL26 gene as a glutathione-S-transferase (GST) fusion protein (GST-247). Three days after infection at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 3 pfu cell-1, the GST-247 fusion protein was purified from a cytoplasmic lysate by Glutathione Sepharose 4-B affinity chromatography with reproducible yields of 11-38 mg L-1 of recombinant protein and > or = 90% purity. Maximum production of this protein was observed at a cell density of 5.0 x 10(6) cells ml-1.
91	PR	9325319	Previously we have shown that ICR-27, a clone of glucocorticoid-resistant human leukemic T cells, showed rapid cell loss upon transient transfection with plasmids expressing certain fragments of the human glucocorticoid receptor lacking the ligand binding domain. An extreme example was the frameshift GR mutant 465*, mutated after amino acid 465. This generated a novel 21-amino acid "tail," beginning within the second zinc finger of the human glucocorticoid receptor DNA binding domain, a region required for ICR-27 cell death caused by hologlucocorticoid receptor plus hormone. The cell loss mediated by 465* was faster but quantitatively equivalent to that caused by hologlucocorticoid receptor plus hormone. We are therefore investigating the mechanism of action of 465*. We overexpressed 465* with or without a glutathione S-transferase tag fused to its N terminus and tested its ability to affect glucocorticoid response element (GRE)-driven reactions in vitro. Partially purified 465* showed little binding to a consensus GRE, caused virtually no stimulation of transcription from a GRE, and failed to inhibit GR-driven transcription. However, GST-465* "trapped" several proteins from ICR-27 cell extracts, including c-Jun; recombinant c-Jun also was bound in vitro. In co-transfection assays of CV-1 cells, 465* expression reduced phorbol ester (12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate) transcriptional activation from a promoter containing multiple AP-1 sites. Further studies proved the repressive activity of 465* was c-Jun-specific and not due to squelching artifacts. The data suggest that interaction of 465* with other proteins, such as c-Jun, might be responsible for its cell killing function.
91	NR	9380507	The transcription factor E2F plays a key role in transcriptional control during the growth cycle of higher eukaryotic cells. The promoter region of the DrosophilaDNA polymerase alpha 180 kDa catalytic subunit gene contains three E2F recognition sequences located at positions -353 to -342 (E2F site 1), -21 to -14 (E2F site 2) and -12 to -5 (E2F site 3) with respect to the transcription initiation site. Various base substitutions were generated in each or all of the three E2F sites in vitro to allow examination of their effects on E2F binding and promoter function in cultured Kc cells as well as in living flies. Glutathione S-transferase (GST)-E2F and GST-DP fusion proteins were found to cooperate in binding to the three E2F sites in the DNA polymerase alpha gene promoter in vitro. In contrast, an E2F-specific activity detected in nuclear extracts of Kc cells showed little affinity for E2F site 1 but strong binding to sites 2 and 3. Transient expression of Drosophila E2F in Kc cells activated the DNA polymerase alpha gene promoter and the target sites for activation coincided with E2F sites 2 and 3. However, analyses with transgenic flies indicate that E2F site 3 functions positively in terms of DNA polymerase alpha gene promoter activity, while E2F sites 1 and 2 rather have a negative control function. Thus E2F sites play distinct roles as positive or negative elements in regulation of the DNA polymerase alpha gene promoter during Drosophila development.
91	NR	9311810	The herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) infected-cell protein 0 (ICP0) has the characteristics of a promiscuous transactivator of genes introduced into cells by infection or transfection. To identify cellular proteins interacting with ICP0, we used a domain of exon II of ICP0 that is known to be crucial for regulatory function of the protein as bait in the yeast two-hybrid screen. Our results were as follows. (i) A cDNA in a positive yeast colony was found to encode cyclin D3, a cell cycle regulator of G1 phase. (ii) A purified chimeric protein consisting of glutathione S-transferase (GST) fused to cyclin D3 specifically formed complexes with ICP0 contained in HSV-1-infected cell lysate. (iii) To enhance the expression of cyclin D3, the gene was inserted into the viral genome and overexpressed in infected cells. The overexpressed cyclin D3 colocalized with ICP0 in nuclear structures characteristic of ND10 and which earlier have been reported to contain ICP0. (iv) The accumulation of cyclin D3 protein in Vero cells infected with an alpha0 deletion mutant was reduced relative to that of cells infected with wild-type virus or a recombinant virus in which the deleted alpha0 sequences were restored. (v) Lysates of Spodoptera frugiperda Sf9 cells doubly infected with baculoviruses genetically engineered to express cyclin D3 and cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) phosphorylated GST fused to retinoblastoma protein (GST-pRb) but did not phosphorylate the GST-alpha0(20-241) or GST-alpha0(543-768) fusion protein or immunoprecipitated ICP0 proteins. Moreover, the chimeric GST-ICP0(exon II) protein shown to bind cyclin D3 had no effect on the activity of the kinase on GST-pRb when added to mixtures of lysates of Sf9 cells which coexpressed cyclin D3 and CDK4. These results indicate that ICP0 interacts with, colocalizes with, and stabilizes the cyclin D3 cell cycle regulator and does not affect its interaction with the cyclin-dependent kinase.
91	NR	9303316	The Drosophila nucleosome remodeling factor NURF utilizes the energy of ATP hydrolysis to perturb the structure of nucleosomes and facilitate binding of transcription factors. The ATPase activity of purified NURF is stimulated significantly more by nucleosomes than by naked DNA or histones alone, suggesting that NURF is able to recognize specific features of the nucleosome. Here, we show that the interaction between NURF and nucleosomes is impaired by proteolytic removal of the N-terminal histone tails and by chemical cross-linking of nucleosomal histones. The ATPase activity of NURF is also competitively inhibited by each of the four Drosophila histone tails expressed as GST fusion proteins. A similar inhibition is observed for a histone H4 tail substituted with glutamine at four conserved, acetylatable lysines. These findings indicate a novel role for the flexible histone tails in chromatin remodeling by NURF, and this role may, in part, be independent of histone acetylation.
91	NR	9228013	Endothelial nitric-oxide synthase (eNOS) and caveolin-1 are associated within endothelial plasmalemmal caveolae. It is not known, however, whether eNOS and caveolin-1 interact directly or indirectly or whether the interaction affects eNOS activity. To answer these questions, we have cloned the bovine caveolin-1 cDNA and have investigated the eNOS-caveolin-1 interaction in an in vitro binding assay system using glutathione S-transferase (GST)-caveolin-1 fusion proteins and baculovirus-expressed bovine eNOS. We have also mapped the domains involved in the interaction using an in vivo yeast two-hybrid system. Results obtained using both in vitro and in vivo protein interaction assays show that both N- and C-terminal cytosolic domains of caveolin-1 interact directly with the eNOS oxygenase domain. Interaction of eNOS with GST-caveolin-1 fusion proteins significantly inhibits enzyme catalytic activity. A synthetic peptide corresponding to caveolin-1 residues 82-101 also potently and reversibly inhibits eNOS activity by interfering with the interaction of the enzyme with Ca2+/calmodulin (CaM). Regulation of eNOS in endothelial cells, therefore, may involve not only positive allosteric regulation by Ca2+/CaM, but also negative allosteric regulation by caveolin-1.
91	DR	9226723	An activated form of the human cytokine-suppressive anti-inflammatory drug-binding protein 2 (CSBP2) kinase was expressed in Spodoptera frugiperda (SF9) cells from a baculovirus vector. To maximize expression and to facilitate purification of the recombinant protein, CSBP2 kinase was expressed as a carboxy-terminal fusion protein to glutathione S-transferase (GST). Under optimal conditions, 2-3 mg of GST-CSBP2 could be obtained per liter of infected cell culture. The fusion protein was easily purified from the soluble fraction of the total cell lysate under nondenaturing conditions by using a glutathione-Sepharose 4B affinity resin. As expected, the purified GST-CSBP2 fusion protein was approximately 68 kDa as determined by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis analysis and reacted with antibodies directed toward either the GST or the CSBP amino terminus. To obtain activated CSBP2, SF9 cells were coinfected with two recombinant baculovirus vectors: one that directed the synthesis of the GST-CSBP2 fusion protein and a second vector that directed the synthesis of a constitutively active form of the CSBP activating kinase, MKK3. Coexpression of GST-CSBP2 kinase with the MKK3 activator increased GST-CSBP2 activity 8- to 10-fold based on the ability of GST-CSBP2 to phosphorylate the substrate, myelin basic protein (MBP), and the ATF2 transcription factor, in vitro. Moreover, activated GST-CSBP2 was capable of activating a bacterially derived mitogen-activated protein kinase-activating protein kinase 2 in vitro. The activity of insect-derived GST-CSBP2 was also inhibited by the CSBP inhibitor, SB202190. We anticipate that the preparation and purification techniques described in this study will facilitate further biochemical characterization of this kinase.
91	NR	9211795	The pr1 gene of the entomopathogenic fungus Metarhizium anisopliae encodes a serine protease that is highly active towards the insect cuticle and whose synthesis is subject to both carbon and nitrogen repression. The pr1 promoter region was sequenced revealing the presence of putative CREA- and AREA-binding sites. In vitro bandshift experiments demonstrated that an Aspergillus nidulans GST-CREA fusion protein was capable of binding to two of the three putative CREA sites. Using a PCR-based strategy the M. anisopliae crr1 gene was identified; it encodes a putative C2H2-type DNA-binding protein with significant sequence similarity to A. nidulans CREA. Complementation experiments with an A. nidulans strain carrying creA204 demonstrated that CRR1 can partially substitute for CREA function.
91	NR	9188854	P130 shares structural and functional homology with pRb and p107. One property common to p107 and p130, but not to pRb, is the ability to stably interact with cyclin A/cdk2 and cyclin E/cdk2 complexes in vitro and in vivo. Using GST-p130 fusion proteins representing various regions of p130, baculovirus-produced cyclin A/cdk2 and cyclin E/cdk2 complexes were found to interact with residues within a part of p130 known as the spacer region. Cyclin E was able to bind the p130 spacer region in the presence or absence of cdk2 whereas cyclin A binding was dependent upon the presence of cdk2. The smallest p130 fusion protein sufficient to interact with cyclin A/cdk2 or cyclin E/cdk2 complexes contained p130 amino acids 652-698 and deletion of p130 amino acids 680-682 abolished binding to both of the cyclin/cdk2 complexes. When overexpressed in C33A cells, a p130 mutant containing a deletion of amino acids 620-697 was unable to form complexes with either cyclin A or cyclin E. This p130 mutant was at least as active as wild type p130 in suppressing the growth of G418 resistant colonies when overexpressed in C33A or SAOS-2 cells.
91	NR	9121472	The human proto-oncogene product c-Cbl and a similar protein in Caenorhabditis elegans (Sli-1) contain a proline-rich COOH-terminal region that binds Src homology 3 (SH3) domains of proteins such as the adapter Grb2. Cb1-Grb2 complexes can be recruited to tyrosine-phosphorylated epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptors through the SH2 domain of Grb2. Here we identify by molecular cloning a Drosophila cDNA encoding a protein (Drosophila Cbl [D-Cbl]) that shows high sequence similarity to the N-terminal region of human c-Cbl but lacks proline-rich sequences and fails to bind Grb2. Nonetheless, in COS-1 cells, expression of hemagglutinin epitope-tagged D-Cbl results in its coimmunoprecipitation with EGF receptors in response to EGF. EGF also caused tyrosine phosphorylation of D-Cbl in such cells, but no association of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase was detected in assays using anti-p85 antibody. A point mutation in D-Cbl (G305E) that suppresses the negative regulation of LET-23 by the Cbl homolog Sli-1 in C. elegans prevented tyrosine phosphorylation of D-Cbl as well as binding to the liganded EGF receptor in COS-1 cells. Colocalization of EGF receptors with both endogenous c-Cbl or expressed D-Cbl in endosomes of EGF-treated COS-1 cells is also demonstrated by immunofluorescence microscopy. In lysates of adult transgenic Drosophila melanogaster, GST-DCbl binds to the tyrosine-phosphorylated 150-kDa torso-DER chimeric receptor. Expression of D-Cbl directed by the sevenless enhancer in intact Drosophila compromises severely the development of the R7 photoreceptor neuron. These data suggest that despite the lack of Grb2 binding sites, D-Cbl functions as a negative regulator of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling in the Drosophila eye by a mechanism that involves its association with EGF receptors or other tyrosine kinases.
91	DR	9087424	Provirus insertion in the last intron of the Tpl-2 gene in retrovirus-induced rat T-cell lymphomas results in the enhanced expression of a carboxy-terminally truncated Tpl-2 kinase. Here we show that the truncated protein exhibits an approximately sevenfold higher catalytic activity and is two- to threefold more efficient in activating the MAPK and SAPK pathways relative to the wild-type protein. The truncated Tpl-2 protein and a GST fusion of the Tpl-2 carboxy-terminal tail interact when coexpressed in Sf9 cells. Their interaction down-regulates the kinase activity of the truncated protein suggesting that tail-directed intramolecular interactions regulate the Tpl-2 kinase. Tpl-2 transgenic mice expressing the wild-type protein from the proximal Lck promoter fail to show a biological phenotype, whereas mice expressing the truncated protein develop large-cell lymphoblastic lymphomas of T-cell origin. These results show that Tpl-2 is an oncogenic kinase that is activated by carboxy-terminal truncation.
91	NR	9050839	Phosphorylation of the p53 tumor suppressor protein is known to modulate its functions. Using bacterially produced glutathione S-transferase (GST)-p53 fusion protein and baculovirus-expressed histidine-tagged p53 ((His)p53), we have determined human p53 phosphorylation by purified forms of jun-N-kinase (JNK), protein kinase A (PKA), and beta subunit of casein kinase II (CKIIbeta) as well as by kinases present in whole cell extracts (WCEs). We demonstrate that PKA is potent p53 kinase, albeit, in a conformation- and concentration-dependent manner, as concluded by comparing full-length with truncated forms of p53. We further demonstrate JNK interaction with GST-p53 and the ability of JNK to phosphorylate truncated forms of GST-p53 or full-length (His)p53. Dependence of phosphorylation on conformation of p53 is further supported by the finding that the wild-type form of p53 (p53wt) undergoes better phosphorylation by CKIIbeta and by WCE kinases than mutant forms of p53 at amino acid 249 (p53(249)) or 273 (p53(273)). Moreover, shifting the kinase reaction's temperature from 37 degrees C to 18 degrees C reduces the phosphorylation of mutant p53 to a greater extent than of p53wt. Comparing truncated forms of p53 revealed that the ability of CKIIbeta, PKA, or WCE kinases to phosphorylate p53 requires amino acids 97-155 within the DNA-binding domain region. Among three 20-aa peptides spanning this region we have identified residues 97-117 that increase p53 phosphorylation by CKIIbeta while inhibiting p53 phosphorylation by PKA or WCE kinases. The importance of this region is further supported by computer modeling studies, which demonstrated that mutant p53(249) exhibits significant changes to the conformation of p53 within amino acids 97-117. In summary, phosphorylation-related analysis of different p53 forms in vitro indicates that conformation of p53 is a key determinant in its availability as a substrate for different kinases, as for the phosphorylation pattern generated by the same kinase.
91	PR	9042338	The protein tyrosine kinase p72syk (Syk) is expressed in a variety of hematopoietic cell types, including B cells, thymocytes, mast cells and others. Both the activity and phosphotyrosine content of this enzyme increase in these cells in response to engagement of the appropriate cell surface receptors. Herein, we describe the cloning of murine Syk and its expression in Sf9 cells as a catalytically active protein. Full-length Syk and a catalytically active 42.5 kDa carboxyl terminal fragment were also expressed as glutathione S-transferase fusion proteins. Comparative reverse phase HPLC and 40% alkaline gel analysis of tryptic digests of phosphorylated Syk demonstrated that all of the major sites of autophosphorylation were also present in GST-Syk and all but one were contained in the 42.5 kDa fragment. The sites of autophosphorylation were identified using a combination of Edman sequencing and mass spectrometric analysis. Ten sites were identified. One site is located in the amino terminal half of the molecule between the two tandem Src homology 2 (SH2) domains. Five sites are located in the hinge region located between the carboxyl terminal SH2 domain and the kinase domain. Two sites lie in the kinase domain within the catalytic loop and two near the extreme carboxyl terminus. Sequences of phosphorylation sites located within the hinge region predict that Syk serves as a docking site for other SH2 domain-containing proteins. Consistent with this prediction, autophosphorylated Syk efficiently binds the carboxyl terminal SH2 domain of phospholipase C-gamma 1.
91	PR	9043696	NA
91	NR	9009269	TEL is a novel member of the ETS family of transcriptional regulators which is frequently involved in human leukemias as the result of specific chromosomal translocations. We show here by co-immunoprecipitation and GST chromatography analyses that TEL and TEL-derived fusion proteins form homotypic oligomers in vitro and in vivo. Deletion mutagenesis identifies the TEL oligomerization domain as a 65 amino acid region which is conserved in a subset of the ETS proteins including ETS-1, ETS-2, FLI-1, ERG-2 and GABP alpha in vertebrates and PNTP2, YAN and ELG in Drosophila. TEL-induced oligomerization is shown to be essential for the constitutive activation of the protein kinase activity and mitogenic properties of TEL-platelet derived growth factor receptor beta (PDGFR beta), a fusion oncoprotein characteristic of the leukemic cells of chronic myelomonocytic leukemia harboring a t(5;12) chromosomal translocation. Swapping experiments in which the TEL oligomerization domain was exchanged by the homologous domains of representative vertebrate ETS proteins including ETS-1, ERG-2 and GABP alpha show that oligomerization is a specific property of the TEL amino-terminal conserved domain. These results indicate that the amino-terminal domain conserved in a subset of the ETS proteins has evolved to generate a specialized protein-protein interaction interface which is likely to be an important determinant of their specificity as transcriptional regulators.
91	NR	9131781	The functional ecdysteroid receptor complex consists of a nuclear receptor heterodimer of ecdysteroid receptor (EcR) and ultraspiracle (USP). EcR and USP of both Chironomus tentans and Drosophila melanogaster were expressed in Escherichia coli as fusion proteins with glutathione S-transferase (GST). Cell lysis and protein solubilization with the anionic detergent sarkosyl yielded preparations of EcR and USP with properties similar to those of the endogenous receptors in various respects. The heterodimer of the expressed proteins specifically bound the labeled ecdysteroid (Ec) [3H]ponasterone A. Furthermore, it preferentially recognized the palindromic ecdysone response element (EcRE) PALI. Interestingly, binding to the PAL1 element was also observed for EcR homodimers. USP homodimers, in turn, preferentially bound to the direct repeat element DR1. When incubated with native polytene chromosomes of Chironomus, EcR/USP specifically accumulated at the early Ec-inducible puff site IV-2B.
91	NR	8932386	Drosophila ribosomal protein PO was overexpressed in Escherichia coli to allow for its purification, biochemical characterization and to generate polyclonal antibodies for Western analysis. Biochemical tests were originally performed to see if overexpressed PO contained DNase activity similar to that recently reported for the apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP) lyase activity associated with Drosophila ribosomal protein S3. The overexpressed ribosomal protein was subsequently found to act on AP DNA, producing scissions that were in this case 5' of a baseless site instead of 3', as has been observed for S3. As a means of confirming that the source of AP endonuclease activity was in fact due to PO, glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusions containing a Factor Xa cleavage site between GST and PO were constructed, overexpressed in an E.coli strain defective for the major 5'-acting AP endonucleases and the fusions purified using glutathione-agarose affinity column chromatography. Isolated fractions containing purified GST-PO fusion proteins were subsequently found to have authentic AP endonuclease activity. Moreover, glutathione-agarose was able to deplete AP endonuclease activity from GST-PO fusion protein preparations, whereas the resin was ineffective in lowering DNA repair activity for PO that had been liberated from the fusion construct by Factor Xa cleavage. These results suggested that PO was a multifunctional protein with possible roles in DNA repair beyond its known participation in protein translation. In support of this notion, tests were performed that show that GST-PO, but not GST, was able to rescue an E.coli mutant lacking the major 5'-acting AP endonucleases from sensitivity to an alkylating agent. We furthermore show that GST-PO can be located in both the nucleus and ribosomes. Its nuclear location can be further traced to the nuclear matrix, thus placing PO in a subcellular location where it could act as a DNA repair protein. Other roles beyond DNA repair seem possible, however, since GST-PO also exhibited significant nuclease activity for both single- and double-stranded DNA.
91	DR	8858161	The ERM proteins, ezrin, radixin, and moesin, are involved in the actin filament/plasma membrane interaction as cross-linkers. CD44 has been identified as one of the major membrane binding partners for ERM proteins. To examine the CD44/ERM protein interaction in vitro, we produced mouse ezrin, radixin, moesin, and the glutathione-S-transferase (GST)/CD44 cytoplasmic domain fusion protein (GST-CD44cyt) by means of recombinant baculovirus infection, and constructed an in vitro assay for the binding between ERM proteins and the cytoplasmic domain of CD44. In this system, ERM proteins bound to GST-CD44cyt with high affinity (Kd of moesin was 9.3 +/- 1.6nM) at a low ionic strength, but with low affinity at a physiological ionic strength. However, in the presence of phosphoinositides (phosphatidylinositol [PI], phosphatidylinositol 4-monophosphate [4-PIP], and phosphatidylinositol 4.5-bisphosphate [4,5-PIP2]), ERM proteins bound with a relatively high affinity to GST-CD44cyt even at a physiological ionic strength: 4,5-PIP2 showed a marked effect (Kd of moesin in the presence of 4,5-PIP2 was 9.3 +/- 4.8 nM). Next, to examine the regulation mechanism of CD44/ERM interaction in vivo, we reexamined the immunoprecipitated CD44/ERM complex from BHK cells and found that it contains Rho-GDP dissociation inhibitor (GDI), a regulator of Rho GTPase. We then evaluated the involvement of Rho in the regulation of the CD44/ERM complex formation. When recombinant ERM proteins were added and incubated with lysates of cultured BHK cells followed by centrifugation, a portion of the recombinant ERM proteins was recovered in the insoluble fraction. This binding was enhanced by GTP gamma S and markedly suppressed by C3 toxin, a specific inhibitor of Rho, indicating that the GTP form of Rho in the lysate is required for this binding. A mAb specific for the cytoplasmic domain of CD44 also markedly suppressed this binding, identifying most of the binding partners for exogenous ERM proteins in the insoluble fraction as CD44. Consistent with this binding analysis, in living BHK cells treated with C3 toxin, most insoluble ERM proteins moved to soluble compartments in the cytoplasm, leaving CD44 free from ERM. These findings indicate that Rho regulates the CD44/ERM complex formation in vivo and that the phosphatidylinositol turnover may be involved in this regulation mechanism.
91	NR	8794317	Geminiviruses are small DNA viruses that replicate in the nuclei of infected plant cells. The closely related geminiviruses tomato golden mosaic virus and bean golden mosaic virus each encode a protein, AL1, that catalyzes the initiation of rolling-circle replication. Both viruses also specify a second replication protein, AL3, that greatly enhances the level of viral DNA accumulation. Using recombinant proteins produced in a baculovirus expression system, we showed that AL1 copurifies with a protein fusion of glutathione S-transferase (GST) and AL1, independent of the GST domain. Similarly, authentic AL3 cofractionates with a GST-AL3 fusion protein. These results demonstrated that both AL1 and AL3 form oligomers. Immunoprecipitation of protein extracts from insect cells expressing both AL1 and AL3 showed that the two proteins also complex with each other. None of the protein interactions displayed virus specificity; the tomato and bean golden mosaic virus proteins complexed with each other. The addition of heterologous replication proteins had no effect on the efficiency of geminivirus replication in transient-replication assays, suggesting that heteroprotein complexes might be functional. The significance of these protein interactions is discussed with respect to geminivirus replication in plant cells.
91	DR	8798570	ELK is a member of the Eph-related tyrosine kinase family that includes receptors signaling axonal guidance, neuronal bundling, and angiogenesis. We recently identified ELK expression in human renal microvascular endothelial cells and sought to identify intracellular proteins through which it signals responses. The cytoplasmic domain of ELK was used as "bait" in a yeast two-hybrid screen to identify interactive proteins expressed from a randomly primed embryonic murine library (E9.5-10.5). Among interactive products of 76 cDNAs characterized, 10 nonidentical, overlapping clones encoded the SH2 domain of the recently reported Grb10 adapter protein, and an additional 3 encoded Grb2. A self-phosphorylated recombinant, baculovirus-expressed GST-ELKcy fusion protein bound Grb10 and Grb2 from human renal microvascular endothelial cell extracts, while the unphosphorylated fusion form did not. Site-directed mutation identified Tyr-929 as a putative phosphorylation site required for Grb10, but not Grb2, interaction in yeast and recombinant protein assays. The ELK ligand, LERK-2/Fc, stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of ELK, and recruitment of Grb10 and Grb2 to endothelial ELK receptors recovered by wheat germ agglutinin lectin and immunoprecipitation. These findings define ligand-activated interaction between ELK and the SH2 domains of Grb2 and the newly identified Grb10 protein that shares homology with a Caenorhabditis elegans gene product implicated in neural cell migration.
91	DR	8882936	All seven nonstructural (ns) proteins of the flavivirus Kunjin (KUN) ranging from NS1 to NS5 were expressed either alone or as fusion proteins with Glutathione-S-transferase (GST). High level expression of recombinant proteins was achieved in Spodoptera frugiperda (Sf9) cells using the baculovirus expression system in contrast to the low level of expression in E. coli. The order of the level of expression of the recombinant fusion proteins per 4 x 10(7) Sf9 cells was: GST-NS5 (yields approximately 4-5 mg) > GST-delta NS3 (approximately 1-2 mg) > GST-4A (approximately 1 mg) > GST-2B (approximately 0.5-1 mg) > GST-2A (approximately 0.5 mg) > GST-4B (approximately 0.1-0.2 mg). NS1 protein was expressed in a native form at the level of approximately 2-4 mg per 4 x 10(7) Sf9 cells. All the GST-fusion proteins were purified by adsorption on Glutathione Sepharose (GS) beads from solubilized lysates of Sf9 cells infected with the recombinant baculoviruses, or of E. coli cultures transformed with the expression plasmid and induced with IPTG. Only delta NS3 protein was recovered intact by removing GST from the fusion protein by digestion with Factor Xa protease. Attempts to cleave off the GST moiety from all the other purified recombinant proteins resulted either in inefficient cleavage or in degradation of the proteins. No GST-NS5 but from 20 to 50% of the purified GST-NS2A, GST-NS2B, GST-delta NS3, GST-NS4A, and GST-NS4B was eluted off the GS beads by adding glutathione. Thus, KUN purified recombinant proteins, either in eluted form or while immobilized on GS beads, could be used to raise monospecific antibodies, to perform functional assays or to participate in protein-protein or RNA-protein binding reactions.
91	NR	8805332	BACKGROUND. Receptor-mediated signal transduction requires the assembly of multimeric complexes of signalling proteins, and a number of conserved protein domains, such as the SH2, SH3 and PH domains, are involved in mediating protein-protein interactions in such complexes. The identification of binding partners for these domains has added considerably to our understanding of signal-transduction pathways, and the purpose of this work was to identify SH3-binding proteins in haematopoietic cells. RESULTS. We performed affinity-chromatography experiments with a panel of GST-SH3 fusion proteins (composed of glutathione-S-transferase appended to various SH3 domains) to search for SH3-binding proteins in a human megakaryocytic cell line. Protein microsequencing identified one of the SH3-binding proteins as WASp, the protein that is defective in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) and isolated X-linked thrombocytopenia. WASp bound preferentially in vitro to SH3 domains from c-Src family kinases, and analysis of proteins expressed in insect cells using a baculovirus vector demonstrated a specific interaction between WASp and the Fyn protein-tyrosine kinase. Finally, in vivo experiments showed that WASp and Fyn physically associate in human haematopoietic cells. CONCLUSIONS. Haematopoietic cells from individuals with WAS exhibit defects in cell morphology and signal transduction, including reduced proliferation and tyrosine phosphorylation in response to stimulatory factors. Members of the c Src family of protein-tyrosine kinases, including Fyn, are involved in a range of signalling pathways - such as those regulating cytoskeletal structure - in both haematopoietic and non-haematopoietic cells. Our data suggest that binding of Fyn to WASp may be a critical event in such signalling pathways in haematopoietic cells.
91	NR	8864858	Heterochromatin-associated protein 1 (HP1) is a nonhistone chromosomal component tightly associated with the pericentromeric heterochromatic region of fruit fly, mouse, and human throughout the cell cycle. Drosophila HP1 has been shown to be involved in position effect variegation and to be required for the correct chromosome segregation in vivo, while the biological activity of human homolog (HP1Hsa) has not yet been characterized. We previously reported that human CENP-B and CENP-C, two major centromere heterochromatin autoantigens often recognized by autosera in scleroderma patients, possess DNA-binding activity in vitro. Here, we show that human HP1, which is also an autoantigen targeted by some types of anticentromere autosera, is a DNA-binding protein. Human HP1 was expressed as a GST-fusion in Escherichia coli and purified with glutathione-Sepharose. The DNA-binding activity of the recombinant HP1 was demonstrated by gel mobility shift assay and South-Western-type blotting. The minimum DNA-binding region was further limited to the internal 64-amino acid stretch that is less-conserved between human and fruit fly but retains a helix-enriched motif with weak similarity to CENP-C. This suggests that HP1 is involved in the pericentromeric heterochromatin formation by directly associating with genomic DNA.
91	NR	8822638	We have recently shown that neutralizing epitope(s) exist near the C-terminal of JE virus E-protein by expressing the coding gene cDNA fragments as fusion proteins with protein A. Among four cDNA fragments, the fragment (B3) carrying the coding sequence of amino acid number 373-399 of E protein elicited the highest neutralizing (N) antibody titer (1:75). To exclude the possible influence of protein A contained in the expressed gene products on the mouse immune response, we expressed (B3) using pGEX-3X expression vector as fusion with glutathione-S transferase (GST). The mice immunized with recombinant GST-B3 fusion protein induced an immune response (mean average ELISA: 3364; N: 1:75) almost similar to that by recombinant protein A-B3 fusion protein (mean average ELISA: 3476; N: 1:75). While hemagglutination-inhibition (HI) antibodies were not induced by this fusion protein. These results indicate that 27 amino acid sequence on the E protein (373-399) was sufficient to induce neutralizing antibodies without association with protein A moiety.
91	NR	8670831	Non-claret disjunctional (Ncd) is a kinesin-related microtubule motor protein in Drosophila that functions in meiotic spindle assembly in oocytes and spindle pole maintenance in early embryos. The partial loss-of-function mutant ncdD retains mitotic, but not meiotic, function. The predicted NcdD mutant protein contains a V556-->F mutation in the putative microtubule binding region of the Ncd motor domain. Here we report an analysis of the properties of recombinant Ncd and NcdD proteins. A GST-NcdD fusion protein translocated microtubules approximately 10-fold more slowly than the corresponding wild-type protein in gliding assays. The maximum microtubule-stimulated ATPase activity of an NcdD motor domain protein was reduced approximately 3-fold and an approximately 3-fold greater concentration of microtubules was required for half-maximal stimulation of ATPase activity, compared with the corresponding wild-type protein. The Km for ATP and basal rate of ATP turnover were, in contrast, similar for the NcdD mutant and wild-type Ncd motor domain proteins. Pelleting assays demonstrated that the binding of the mutant NcdD motor protein to microtubules was reduced in the absence of nucleotide, relative to wild-type. The reduced velocity of NcdD translocation on microtubules is therefore correlated with reductions in microtubule-stimulated ATPase activity and affinity of the mutant motor for microtubules. The characteristics of the NcdD motor explain its meiotic loss of function, and are consistent with partial motor activity of Ncd being sufficient for its mitotic, but not its meiotic, role.
91	DR	8842749	Two transmembrane serine-threonine kinases (type I and II receptors), a membrane-anchored proteoglycan (type III), and a homodimeric ligand participate in the transforming growth factor beta type one (TGF beta 1) signal transduction complex. The expression of recombinant receptors in insect cells co-infected with up to three recombinant baculoviruses was employed to study interactions among the ectodomains of the three types of receptors and the TGF beta 1 ligand in absence of uncontrollable extrinsic factors in mammalian cells. Multi-subunit complexes were assembled in intact cells and purified on glutathione-conjugated beads for analysis by tagging one of the subunits with glutathione S-transferase (GST). Intrinsic ligand-independent interactions were observed among receptor subunits as follows: type III-III, type I-I, type III-I, and type II-I. The homeotypic complex of type II-II receptors and the heterotypic type III-II interaction was ligand dependent. The type I, but not the type III, subunit displaced about 50% of the type II component in either ligand-dependent homomeric type II-type II complexes or heteromeric type III-type II complexes to form type II-I or type III-II-I oligomers, respectively. The type II subunit displaced type I subunits in oligomers of the type I subunit. Specificity of type I receptors may result from differential affinity for the type II receptor rather than specificity for ligand. A monomeric subunit of the TGF beta 1 ligand bound concurrently to type III and type II or type III and type I receptors, but failed to concurrently bind to the type II and type I subunits. The binding of TGF beta 1 to the type I kinase subunit appears to require an intact disulfide-linked ligand dimer in the absence of a type III subunit. The combined results suggest a pentameric TGF beta signal transduction complex in which one unit each of the type III, type II, and type I components is assembled around the two subunits of the dimeric TGF beta ligand. An immobilized GST-tagged subunit of the receptor complex was utilized to assemble multi-subunit complexes in vitro and to study the phosphorylation events among subunits in the absence of extrinsic cell-derived kinases. The results revealed that (a) a low level of ligand-independent autophosphorylation occurs in the type I kinase; (b) a high level of autophosphorylation occurs in the type II kinase; (c) both the type III and type I subunits are trans-phosphorylated by the type II subunit; and (d) the presence of both type I and II kinases complexed with the type III subunit and dimeric TGF beta 1 ligand in a pentameric complex causes maximum phosphorylation of all three receptor subunits.
91	DR	8647461	A non-myristylated form (LCK M) of the human T-lymphocyte-specific protein tyrosine kinase (LCK) was produced at high levels in a baculovirus expression system (BVES) using two strategies. First, LCK M was produced by direct expression of a Gly2 --> Ala mutant of LCK. Second, LCK was produced as a glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion, and LCK M was derived from the fusion protein by cleavage with thrombin. Both recombinant proteins (re-proteins) were produced at 5% of the total protein of infected Spodoptera frugiperda (Sf9) cells and were purified to >95% homogeneity. The enzymatic properties of the re-proteins and their inhibition by protein kinase inhibitors were comparable to the native enzyme (LCK N) derived from Jurkat cells and wild-type LCK derived from the BVES. The high production levels will facilitate the recovery of large quantities of re-protein for use in biochemical and biophysical studies.
91	PR	8621443	Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), a potent angiogenic factor, uses two receptor tyrosine kinases, FLK/KDR and FLT, to mediate its activities. We have cross-linked 125I-VEGF165 to the cell surface of various tumor cell lines and of human umbilical vein endothelial cells. High molecular mass (220 and 240 kDa) and/or lower molecular mass (165 and 175 kDa) labeled complexes were detected depending on the cell type. The 220- and 240-kDa labeled complexes were shown to contain FLT and FLK/KDR receptors, respectively. On the other hand, the 165- and 175-kDa complexes did not seem to contain FLK/KDR or FLT but instead appeared to contain novel VEGF receptors with relatively low molecular masses of approximately 120 and 130 kDa. These receptors were further characterized in breast cancer MDA MB 231 cells (231), which did not form the high molecular mass complexes and which did not express detectable amounts of flk/kdr or flt mRNA. The 231 cells displayed one VEGF165 binding site, with a Kd of 2.8 x 10(-10) M and 0.95 1.1 x 10(5) binding sites per cell. By comparison, human umbilical vein endothelial cells had two binding sites, one with a Kd of 7.5 x 10(-12) M, presumably FLK/KDR, and the other with a Kd of 2 x 10(-10) M, a value similar to the VEGF binding sites on 231 cells. These lower affinity/molecular mass receptors on 231 cells cross-linked 125I-VEGF165 but not 125I-VEGF121. Accordingly, exon 7 of VEGF, which encodes the 44 amino acids present in VEGF165 that are absent in VEGF121, was fused to glutathione S-transferase (GST). The GST-VEGF-exon 7 fusion protein bound to heparin-Sepharose with a similar affinity as VEGF165 and inhibited the binding of 125I-VEGF165 to 231 cells. Cross-linking of 125I-GST-VEGF-exon 7 to 231 cells resulted in the formation of 150- and 160-kDa labeled complexes that presumably contained the 120- and 130-kDa lower affinity/molecular mass VEGF165 receptors. It was concluded that certain tumor-derived cell lines express novel surface-associated receptors that selectively bind VEGF165 via the exon 7-encoded domain, which is absent in VEGF121.
91	PR	8617711	The hepatitis delta virus large antigen (lHDAg) is a virally encoded protein that contains a prenylation signal sequence at its carboxyl terminus consisting of the tetrapeptide Cys-Arg-Pro-Gln. Although the presence of the Gln as the COOH-terminal residue generally specifies addition of the 15-carbon farnesyl isoprenoid, earlier reports had suggested that the protein is modified by the 20-carbon geranylgeranyl. The prenylation of lHDAg was examined in vitro using a fusion protein between glutathione S-transferase and the COOH-terminal 117 amino acids of lHDAg (GST-lHDAg). When recombinant GST-lHDAg was incubated with bovine brain cytosol in the presence of either farnesyl diphosphate or geranylgeranyl diphosphate, GST-lHDAg was preferentially farnesylated. Geranylgeranylation of the fusion protein was also observed, although at a rate considerably less than that of farnesylation. Using purified recombinant protein prenyltransferases, GST-lHDAg was found to be an excellent substrate (apparent Km = 0.8 microM) for protein farnesyltransferase (FTase), while modification by protein geranylgeranyltransferase I (GGTase I) was not detected. FTase was also able to catalyze geranylgeranylation of GST-lHDAg at a very low rate, suggesting that the low level of geranylgeranylation of GST-lHDAg observed in cytosolic preparations was mediated by FTase. Consistent with our observations on the in vitro prenylation of the GST-lHDAg fusion protein, isoprenoid analysis of authentic lHDAg expressed in COS cells demonstrated that the protein was farnesylated. Geranylgeranylation of lHDAg expressed in COS cells was not observed. As prenylation of lHDAg is required for the assembly of the hepatitis delta viral particle, these results suggest that inhibitors of FTase may be useful therapeutic agents for treatment of delta virus infection.
91	NR	8632015	DREF, a transcription regulatory factor which specifically binds to the promoter-activating element DRE (DNA replication-related element) of DNA replication-related genes, was purified to homogeneity from nuclear extracts of Drosophila Kc cells. cDNA for DREF was isolated with the reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction method using primers synthesized on the basis of partial amino acid sequences and following screening of cDNA libraries. Deduced from the nucleotide sequences of cDNA, DREF is a polypeptide of 701 amino acid residues with a molecular weight of 80,096, which contains three characteristic regions, rich in basic amino acids, proline, and acidic amino acids, respectively. Deletion analysis of bacterially expressed DREF fused with glutathione S-transferase (GST-DREF) indicated that a part of the N-terminal basic amino acid region (16-115 amino acids) is responsible for the specific binding to DRE. A polyclonal and four monoclonal antibodies were raised against the GST-DREF fusion protein. The antibodies inhibited specifically the transcription of DNA polymerase alpha promoter in vitro. Cotransfection experiments using Kc cells demonstrated that overproduction of DREF protein overcomes the repression of the proliferating cell nuclear antigen gene promoter by the zerknullt gene product. These results confirmed that DREF is a trans-activating factor for DNA replication-related genes. Immunocytochemical analysis demonstrated the presence of DREF polypeptide in nuclei after the eighth nuclear division cycle, suggesting that nuclear accumulation of DREF is important for the coordinate zygotic expression of DNA replication-related genes carrying DRE sequences.
91	DR	8619803	PrP27-30 represents the protease-resistant core of the prion protein and was found to be the main component in Scrapie prion preparations. Recombinant (r) PrP27-30 corresponding to aa 90-231 from the Syrian golden hamster prion protein was expressed as a fusion with GST in E. coli and secreted from insect cells infected with recombinant baculoviruses, GST::rPrP27-30 isolated from either system was purified to homogenity by glutathione-Sepharose chromatography. rPrP27-30 from both systems was generated by direct cleavage of GST::rPrP27-30 in the presence of thrombin revealing a molecular weight of 17 kDa. GST::rPrP27-30 as well as the authentic protein rPrP27-30 were identified by immunoblotting employing a polyclonal antibody directed against a peptide corresponding to aa 95-110 of the Syrian golden hamster prion protein. In contrast to scrapie prior PrP27-30, the recombinant proteins GST::rPrP27-30 and rPrP27-30 were both sensitive towards proteinase K, suggesting that the molecules lack infectivity.
91	NR	8561800	A combination of the RT-PCR method and subsequent screening of the cDNA library of mouse skeletal muscle with the cDNA isolated by RT-PCR used as a probe led to isolation of cDNAs encoding a polypeptide (mSim) with bHLH and PAS domains which show high similarity to the corresponding regions of Drosophila Sim, a master regulator in neurogenesis. Experiments using a GST-fusion protein demonstrated that mSim heterodimerizes with Arnt (Ah receptor nuclear translocator), even more efficiently than AhR (Ah receptor) does with Arnt. RNA blot analysis using RNAs from various tissues of mice indicated that mSim transcript is expressed in several limited tissues such as muscle, kidney and lung of adult animals. Distribution of mSim mRNA was always accompanied with that of Arnt. All the results suggest a regulatory role of mSim in partnership with Arnt. Chromosomal location of the mSim gene was determined by fluorescent in situ hybridization to be localized on the C3.3-C4 band of mouse chromosome 16 which is syntenic with the human chromosome 21q22 carrying the Down syndrome critical region, where a gene highly homologous to the Drosophila sim was localized. Whole mount in situ hybridization using a unique part of mSim cDNA sequence showed that mSim mRNA was expressed in the ventral diencephalon, branchial arches and limbs. These findings will provide an approach to the cause of the Down syndrome as well as the elucidation of the functional roles of mSim in animal development.
91	NR	7559650	We have found sequences similar to the transcription factor E2F recognition site within the Drosophila proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) gene promoter. These sequences are located at positions -43 to -36 (site I). and -56 to -49 (site II) with respect to the cap site Glutathione S-transferase (GST)-E2F and GST-DP fusion proteins cooperate and bind to the potential E2F sites in the PCNA promoter in vitro. A binding factor(s) to these sequences that has similar binding specificity to that of E2F was detected in nuclear extracts of Drosophila Kc cells. Furthermore, transient expression of target site for the activation coincided with the E2F sites. These results indicate that the PCNA gene is a likely target gene of E2F. Examination of lacZ expression from PCNA-lacZ fusion genes carrying mutations in either or both of two E2F sites introduced into flies by germ line transformation revealed that site II plays a major role in the PCNA promoter activity during embryogenesis and larval development, although both sites are required for optimal promoter activity. However, for maternal expression in ovaries, either one of the two sites is essentially sufficient to direct optimal promoter activity. These results demonstrate, for the first time, an essential role for E2F sites in regulation of PCNA promoter activity during development of a multicellular organism.
91	NR	7574723	The biochemical interactions between digestive proteinases of the Coleoptera pest black vine weevil (Otiorynchus sulcatus) and two plant cysteine proteinase inhibitors, oryzacystatin I (OCI) and oryzacystatin II (OCII), were assessed using gelatin-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, OCI-affinity chromatography, and recombinant forms of the two plant inhibitors. The insect proteinases were resolved in gelatin-containing polyacrylamide gels as five major bands, only three of them being totally or partially inactivated by OCI and OCII. The maximal inhibitory effect of both OCs at pH 5.0 was estimated at 40% and the inhibition was stable with time despite the presence of OC-insensitive proteases, indicating the stability of the OCI and OCII effects. After removing OC-sensitive proteinases from the insect crude extract by OCI-affinity chromatography, the effects of the insect cystatin-insensitive proteases on the structural integrity of the free OCs were analyzed. While OCI remained stable, OCII was subjected to limited proteolysis leading to its gradual transformation into a approximately 10.5-kDa unstable intermediate, OCIIi. As shown by the degradation pattern of a glutathione S-transferase (GST)/OCII fusion protein, the appearance of OCIIi resulted from the C-terminal truncation of OCII. Either free or linked to GST, OCIIi was as active against papain and human cathepsin H as OCII, and the initial specificities of the inhibitor for these two cysteine proteinases were conserved after cleavage. Although these observations indicate the high conformational stability of OCII near its active (inhibitory) site, they also suggest a general conformational destabilization of this inhibitor following its initial cleavage, subsequently leading to its complete hydrolysis. This apparent susceptibility of OCII to proteolytic cleavage by the insect proteinases could have major implications when planning the use of this plant cystatin for insect pest control.
91	PR	7544793	A protein called Tip (tyrosine kinase interacting protein) of herpesvirus saimiri associates with Lck in virus-transformed human T cells and is an in vitro substrate for Lck kinase. Mutational analyses of a GST-Tip fusion protein revealed that binding to Lck requires putative SH3 binding sequences and a sequence homologous to the carboxyl terminus of Src-related kinases. These sequences are referred to as SH3-Binding (SH3B) and C-terminal Src-related Kinase Homology (CSKH) elements. Peptide fragments as short as 37 amino acids containing both SH3B and CSKH elements were sufficient to form a stable complex with Lck in vitro. Furthermore, these same sequences of Tip were necessary for in vivo association with Lck when Tip and Lck were expressed transiently in COS-1 cells or stably in Rat-1 cell lines. These results demonstrate that the CSKH element of Tip participates in the binding of sequences within Lck. Tip of herpesvirus saimiri has apparently acquired such CSKH and SH3B elements for the purpose of targeting cellular protein kinases. The interaction of Tip with Lck may influence Lck kinase activity or its binding to other cellular proteins and thereby alter Lck function in T cells infected by h. saimiri.
91	DR	7609044	This article describes a procedure which permits for the first time the isolation of the prion protein PrPc from the Syrian golden hamster in heterologous systems. Using a glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion approach, milligram amounts of stable, soluble, and homogeneous GST::PrPc protein were obtained in Escherichia coli and with baculovirus-infected insect cells. Authentic PrPc was released from the immobilized fusion protein by direct cleavage with thrombin. GST::PrPc expressed in these two expression systems and also authentic PrPc released by thrombin cleavage were recognized by a polyclonal antibody directed against amino acid 95 to 110 of the golden hamster PrPc protein. GST::PrPc was not detected by a monoclonal antibody recognizing the region encompassing amino acids 138 to 152 of the human prion protein. The fusion protein was sensitive to proteinase K digestion, demonstrating that the cellular rather than the proteinase K-resistant scrapie isoform was produced.
91	PR	7782336	The Ras GTPase-activating protein (GAP) is a target for protein tyrosine kinases of both the receptor and cytoplasmic classes and may serve to integrate tyrosine kinase and Ras signaling pathways. In this report, we provide evidence that GAP is an SH3 domain-binding protein and substrate for the Src-related tyrosine kinase Hck, which has been implicated in the regulation of myeloid cell growth, differentiation, and function. Wild-type (WT) or kinase-inactive (K269E) mutant Hck proteins were co-expressed with bovine GAP using the baculovirus/Sf-9 cell system. GAP was readily phosphorylated on tyrosine by WT but not K269E Hck. GAP was present in WT Hck immunoprecipitates from the co-infected cells, indicative of Hck.GAP complex formation. Unexpectedly, GAP also associated with the kinase-inactive mutant of Hck, suggesting that tyrosine autophosphorylation of Hck is not required for complex formation. The WT and K269E forms of Hck also associated with GAP mutants lacking either the C-terminal catalytic domain (delta CAT) or the Src homology region (delta SH), indicating that these GAP domains are dispensable for complex formation. Recombinant GST fusion proteins containing the Hck, Src, Fyn, or Lck SH3 domains associated with full-length GAP, delta CAT, and delta SH, all of which share an N-terminal proline-rich region resembling an SH3-binding motif (PPLPPPPPQLP). Deletion of the highly conserved YXY sequence from the Hck SH3 domain abolished binding. GAP-SH3 interaction was also inhibited by the proline-rich peptide GFPPLPPPPPQLPTLG, which corresponds to N-terminal amino acids 129-144 of bovine GAP. An N-terminal deletion mutant of GAP lacking this proline-rich region did not bind to the Hck SH3 domain. These data implicate the Hck SH3 domain in GAP interaction, and suggest a general function for the SH3 domains of Src family kinases in recognition of GAP via its proline-rich N-terminal domain.
91	NR	7782767	The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) open reading frame BDLF3 is predicted to code for a glycoprotein on the basis that it contains sequences with signal peptide and transdomain characteristics and nine potential N-linked glycosylation sites. No sequential or positional homologues of BDLF3 have been located in other herpesviruses. A bacterial glutathione S-transferase (GST)-BDLF3 fusion protein was used to demonstrate that over one-third of EBV-immune human sera tested recognized the fusion protein but not GST alone on Western blots. The fusion protein was used to raise polyclonal sera in rabbits. A BDLF3 recombinant baculovirus was constructed using the full-length BDLF3 sequence (AcBDLF3). Rabbit anti-fusion protein sera and some human EBV-immune sera recognized products of approximately 30 and 55 kDa from AcBDLF3-infected insect cells by Western blotting. A peptide representing the carboxy-terminal amino acids 215-234 of the BDLF3 sequence was used to raise anti-peptide sera in rabbits. Anti-peptide serum detected a product by indirect immunofluorescence in acetone-fixed EBV-infected B cells from all cell lines tested. A diffuse band with a molecular mass of 100-150 kDa was detected by Western blot in B95-8 cell lysates, partially purified B95-8 virus and B95-8-infected cell membranes after probing with anti-BDLF3 peptide serum. This product was shown to be glycosylated after enzymatic deglycosylation of a B95-8 virus preparation using neuraminidase, O-glycosidase or N-glycosidase F. The BDLF3 protein products have no known function.
91	NR	7761441	Human, Drosophila melanogaster, and Caenorhabditis elegans cDNA clones encoding homologues of a serine(threonine) protein kinase (EC 2.7.1.37) (designated Ndr protein kinase) have been isolated and sequenced. The human and Drosophila cDNAs predict polypeptides of 54 kDa and 52 kDa, respectively, which share approximately 80% amino acid similarity. Northern analysis of human tissues revealed a ubiquitously expressed 3.9-kb transcript. Recombinant GST-Ndr underwent intramolecular autophosphorylation on serine and threonine residues in vitro but failed to transphosphorylate several standard protein kinase substrates. Transfection of the human cDNA into COS-1 cells resulted in the appearance of an intense nuclear staining in cells analyzed by indirect immunofluorescence; deletion mutagenesis identified a short basic peptide, KRKAETWKRNRR, responsible for the nuclear accumulation of Ndr. Thus, Ndr is a conserved and widely expressed nuclear protein kinase. The closest known relative of this previously uncharacterized kinase is Dbf2, a budding yeast protein kinase required for the completion of nuclear division.
91	DR	9049329	The human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Nef protein was expressed in Escherichia coli as a C-terminal fusion with glutathione S-transferase (GST). The ability of GST-Nef to act as a substrate for cellular kinases in vitro was examined by incubation of purified GST-Nef fusion proteins, immobilized on glutathione-agarose beads, with cytoplasmic extracts from a number of human cell lines. In the presence of [gamma32P]ATP, phosphorylation of Nef occurred predominantly on serine residues. Studies with protein kinase inhibitors suggested that protein kinase C (PKC) was involved in Nef phosphorylation. This was supported further by the demonstration that purified PKC was also able to phosphorylate Nef in the absence of cell extract. Serine/threonine phosphorylation of Nef was also observed in vivo when Nef was expressed with a C-terminal GST or 6-histidine tag in Spodoptera frugiperda insect cells by recombinant baculoviruses. In extracts from Jurkat T cells and U937 monocyte/macrophages Nef also associated with a 57 kDa cellular protein that was itself phosphorylated in vitro. Phosphorylation of this Nef-associated protein was inhibited by heparin and is thus likely to be mediated by casein kinase II. The observation that PKC can phosphorylate Nef in vitro raises the possibility that PKC might play a role in regulating both Nef function and the physical interactions between Nef and cellular components.
91	PR	7890702	G protein-coupled receptor-mediated signaling is attenuated by a process referred to as desensitization, wherein agonist-dependent phosphorylation of receptors by G protein-coupled receptor kinases (GRKs) is proposed to be a key initial event. However, mechanisms that activate GRKs are not fully understood. In one scenario, beta gamma-subunits of G proteins (G beta gamma) activate certain GRKs (beta-adrenergic receptor kinases 1 and 2, or GRK2 and GRK3), via a pleckstrin homology domain in the COOH terminus. This interaction has been proposed to translocate cytosolic beta-adrenergic receptor kinases (beta ARKs) to the plasma membrane and facilitate interaction with receptor substrates. Here, we report a novel finding that membrane lipids modulate beta ARK activity in vitro in a manner that is analogous and competitive with G beta gamma. Several lipids, including phosphatidylserine (PS), stimulated, whereas phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate inhibited, the ability of these GRKs to phosphorylate agonist-occupied m2 muscarinic acetylcholine receptors. Furthermore, both PS and phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate specifically bound to beta ARK1, whereas phosphatidylcholine, a lipid that did not modulate beta ARK activity, did not bind to beta ARK1. The lipid regulation of beta ARKs did not occur via a modulation of its autophosphorylation state. PS- and G beta gamma-mediated stimulation of beta ARK1 was compared and found strikingly similar; moreover, their effects together were not additive (except at initial stages of reaction), which suggests that PS and G beta gamma employed a common interaction and activation mechanism with the kinase. The effects of these lipids were prevented by two well known G beta gamma-binding proteins, phosducin and GST-beta ARK-(466-689) fusion protein, suggesting that the G beta gamma-binding domain (possibly the pleckstrin homology domain) of the GRKs is also a site for lipid:protein interaction. We submit the intriguing possibility that both lipids and G proteins co-regulate the function of GRKs.
91	PR	7530656	Vav is a recently described proto-oncogene expressed only in hematopoietic cells which contains an SH2 and two SH3 domains and shares homology with the Dbl GDP-GTP exchange factor and BCR. p95Vav is phosphorylated on tyrosine residues in response to stimulation of the T cell antigen receptor, cross-linking of IgE or IgM receptors and stimulation of immature hematopoietic cells by Steel factor. Monoclonal antibodies to human Vav were generated and used to examine the events which regulate tyrosine phosphorylation of p95Vav in myeloid cells. In the factor-dependent MO7e cell line, p95Vav was rapidly phosphorylated on tyrosine residues in a dose- and time-dependent manner by GM-CSF, IL-3 and Steel factor. Introduction of the BCR/ABL oncogene into this cell line resulted in factor-independent proliferation and constitutive phosphorylation of p95Vav. Tyrosine phosphorylation of p95Vav was also substantially increased by treatment of cytokine-deprived cells with the tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor sodium vanadate. Since many of the cytokines known to induce tyrosine phosphorylation of p95Vav are also known to activate JAK family tyrosine kinases, we looked for an interaction of p95Vav with JAK kinases. p95Vav co-precipitated with JAK2 in MO7e cells stimulated with GM-CSF, but not in unstimulated cells. Also, JAK2 was found to be constitutively associated with p95Vav in vivo when expressed at high levels in insect cells using baculovirus vectors. A fusion protein consisting of glutathione-S-transferase and the SH2 domain of p95Vav (GST-Vav-SH2) precipitated JAK2, suggesting that this interaction is mediated by the SH2 domain of p95Vav.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
91	NR	7488860	We have generated a series of fusion proteins carrying portions of subunit IIc, the second largest subunit of Drosophila RNA polymerase I, and have used them in a domain interference assay to identify a fragment of the IIc subunit that carries the binding site for a basal transcription factor. Fusion proteins carrying a subunit IIc fragment spanning residues Ala519-Gly992 strongly inhibit promoter-driven transcription in both unfractionated nuclear extracts and in reconstituted systems. The same fusion proteins similarly inhibit dTFIIF stimulation of Pol II elongation on dC-tailed templates, suggesting that the IIc(A519-G992) fragment, which carries conserved regions D-H, interferes with transcription by binding to dTFIIF. Finally, dTFIIF can be specifically cross-linked to a GST-IIc(A519-G992) fusion protein or to subunit IIc in intact Pol II.
91	NR	7526154	Binding of type I interferons (IFNs) to their receptors induces rapid tyrosine phosphorylation of multiple proteins, including the alpha and beta subunits of the receptor, the polypeptides that form the transcriptional activator ISGF3 alpha (Stat113, Stat84, and Stat91), and the p135tyk2 and Jak-1 tyrosine kinases. In this report, we demonstrate that the alpha subunit of the type I IFN receptor (IFN-R) corresponds to the product of a previously cloned receptor subunit cDNA and, further, that the p135tyk2 tyrosine kinase directly binds and tyrosine phosphorylates this receptor subunit. Glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion proteins encoding the different regions of the cytoplasmic domain of the alpha subunit can bind the p135tyk2 contained in human cell lysates. The association between the alpha subunit and Tyk2 was demonstrated by immunoblotting with anti-Tyk2 and antiphosphotyrosine antibodies and by using an in vitro kinase assay. Analogous experiments were then performed with recombinant baculoviruses encoding constitutively active Jak family tyrosine kinases. In this case, p135tyk2, but not Jak-1 or Jak-2 protein, binds to the GST-IFN-R proteins, suggesting that the interaction between these two proteins is both direct and specific. We also demonstrate that Tyk2, from extracts of either IFN alpha-treated human cells or insect cells infected with the recombinant baculoviruses, can catalyze in vitro phosphorylation of GST-IFN-R protein in a specific manner. Deletion mutants of the GST-IFN-R protein were used to localize both the binding and tyrosine phosphorylation site(s) to a 46-amino-acid juxtamembrane region of the alpha subunit, which shows sequence homology to functionally similar regions of other cytokine receptor proteins. These data support the hypothesis that the Tyk2 protein functions as part of a receptor complex to initiate intracellular signaling in response to type I IFNs.
91	DR	8076833	We have produced a truncated form of the human estrogen receptor (hER) as a fusion protein with glutathione S-transferase (GST) in Spodoptera frugiperda (Sf) cells using the baculovirus expression vector (BEV) system. The protein is correctly produced and can be purified from crude whole-cell extracts by a single-step, batch-wise affinity-purification procedure. We show that this GST-hER fusion protein binds at its DNA-binding site specifically and in a hormone-inducible manner. Furthermore, we used the purified hER to analyze the complex estrogen response element (ERE) in the promoter of the oxytocin-encoding gene.
91	DR	8058768	Protein kinases share a number of highly conserved or invariant amino acid residues in their catalytic domains, suggesting that these residues are necessary for kinase activity. In p180erbB3, a receptor tyrosine kinase belonging to the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor subfamily, three of these residues are altered, suggesting that this protein might have an impaired protein tyrosine kinase activity. To test this hypothesis, we have expressed human EGF receptor and bovine p180erbB3 in insect cells via baculovirus infection and have compared their autophosphorylation and substrate phosphorylation activities. We have found that, while the EGF receptor readily undergoes EGF-stimulated autophosphorylation and catalyzes the incorporation of phosphate into the model substrates (E4Y1)n (random 4:1 copolymer of glutamic acid and tyrosine) and GST-p85 (glutathione S-transferase fusion protein with the 85-kDa subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase), p180erbB3 autophosphorylation and substrate phosphorylation are at least 2 orders of magnitude less efficient. However, p180erbB3 is capable of binding the ATP analog 5'-p-fluorosulfonylbenzoyladenosine, indicating that the lack of observed kinase activity is probably not due to nonfunctional or denatured receptors expressed by the insect cells. On the basis of these results, we propose that p180erbB3 possesses an impaired intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity.
91	DR	8057354	The nef gene is conserved throughout the primate lentivirus family. Although dispensable in vitro, an important role for nef in vivo is suggested by the failure of SIV nef mutants to establish persistent viraemia. Although the biochemical function of the Nef protein remains equivocal, a consistent theme has emerged with the reproducible observation that Nef expression results in the down-modulation of the cell surface marker CD4. Down-modulation requires amino acid sequences within the cytoplasmic domain of CD4 but occurs by a mechanism distinct from the normal serine phosphorylation-dependent pathway. As CD4 is a transmembrane glycoprotein and Nef a myristoylated protein targeted to the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane we considered that a direct interaction between Nef and CD4 might play a role in down-modulation. Here we demonstrate that a baculovirus-expressed Nef-GST fusion protein interacts specifically with CD4. This interaction requires co-expression in the same cell and is dependent on Nef myristoylation. The site of Nef interaction maps to the cytoplasmic domain of CD4, as a deletion mutant lacking this domain fails to interact with Nef. This observation sheds new light on the biochemical function of Nef and offers new opportunities for the future development of HIV chemotherapy.
91	NR	8051084	The regulatory domain of protein kinase C gamma (PKC gamma) contains the following functional elements which can interact with lipids: the pseudosubstrate motif within the first variable region (V1), cysteine-rich domains, Cys1 and Cys2 which contain zinc and bind phorbol dibutyrate (PDBu)/diacylglycerol, and the calcium-dependent lipid binding domain (CaLB). The function of individual or combined segments of the regulatory domain was investigated, using glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion proteins and mixed micellar or liposomal assays. GST-Cys1 and GST-Cys2 bound PDBu with comparable affinity (Kd = 14-17 nM). GST-Cys1Cys2 yielded a protein with a PDBu binding affinity of 3.4 nM, in the presence of calcium, similar to that of intact PKC gamma (Kd = 2.6 nM). The phosphatidylserine (PS) dependence of PDBu binding was highly cooperative for all fusion proteins tested with Hill numbers (n) lying in the range of 3.5-4.8, similar to values obtained for intact PKC gamma. While Hill numbers were similar under all conditions, the PS concentration necessary for half-maximal PDBu binding was dependent upon the nature and presence of divalent cations. The PS requirement was lowest in the presence of calcium for GST-Cys1, GST-Cys2, and GST-Cys1Cys2 (Km for PS = 11, 14, and 12 mol %, respectively) but still significantly above the value for intact PKC gamma (5.4 mol %). The data establish Cys1 and Cys2 as independent PDBu binding domains that are modulated by divalent cations. While PDBu binding affinity to a GST-V1Cys1 fusion protein (Kd = 36 nM) was comparable to that of GST-Cys1, the CaLB domain dramatically reduced PDBu binding affinity of GST-Cys2CaLB (Kd = 912 nM). This effect of the CaLB domain on PDBu binding to Cys2 suggests that PDBu/diacylglycerol binding to native PKC gamma may occur at Cys1 and that the Cys2 domain may serve another regulatory function.
91	NR	8207801	Transformation by the human papillomavirus (HPV) early gene products, E6 and E7, involves their interaction with cellular proteins p53 and Rb. Using glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion proteins, we found that HPV E6 bound human p53 and that the relative efficiency of binding varied such that the GST-HPV type 16 E6 (16E6) protein bound p53 with highest affinity, followed by GST-31E6, GST-18E6, and GST-11E6. The GST-E6 fusion proteins were sufficient for binding p53 purified from a baculovirus expression system as well as in vitro translation sources, while no association was observed with GST-18E7 or a GST-16E6 mutant bearing a five-amino-acid deletion in E6. When the site-specific DNA binding activity of p53 was examined in the presence of GST-E6 proteins, an inhibition of DNA binding was observed. The degree of inhibition correlated with the relative affinity of different E6 proteins for p53; thus, GST-16E6 was the most potent inhibitor of p53 DNA binding activity, and GST-11E6 was the least effective. Prevention of p53 DNA binding is likely to play a role in the abrogation of the transcriptional activity of p53 by HPV E6 and provides a further mechanism for E6 disruption of p53 growth suppressor function in addition to its role in directing specific degradation of p53 through the ubiquitin-mediated pathway. The variation in inhibition of DNA binding seen with the various E6 proteins may thus contribute to the differences in oncogenic potential seen among the HPV types.
91	NR	8039498	Insulin drives the formation of a complex between tyrosine-phosphorylated IRS-1 and SH2-containing proteins. The SH2-containing protein Grb2 also possesses adjacent SH3 domains, which bind the Ras guanine nucleotide exchange factor Sos. In this report, we examined the involvement of another SH3 binding protein, dynamin, in insulin signal transduction. SH3 domains of Grb2 as GST fusion proteins bound dynamin from lysates of CHO cells expressing wild-type insulin receptor (IR) (CHO-IR cells) in a cell-free system (in vitro). Immunoprecipitation studies using specific antibodies against Grb2 revealed that Grb2 was co-immunoprecipitated with dynamin from unstimulated CHO-IR cells. After insulin treatment of CHO-IR cells, anti-dynamin antibodies co-immunoprecipitated the IR beta-subunit and IRS-1, as tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins and PI 3-kinase activity. However, purified rat brain dynamin did not bind directly to either the IR, IRS-1 or the p85 subunit of PI 3-kinase in vitro. Together, these results suggest that in CHO-IR cells, insulin stimulates the binding of dynamin to tyrosine-phosphorylated IRS-1 via Grb2 and that IRS-1 also associates with PI 3-kinase in response to insulin. This complex formation was reconstituted in vitro using recombinant baculovirus-expressed IRS-1, GST-Grb2 fusion proteins and dynamin peptides containing proline-rich sequences. Furthermore, dynamin GTPase activity was found to be stimulated when an IRS-1-derived phosphopeptide, containing the Grb2 binding site, was added to the dynamin-Grb2 complex in vitro.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
91	NR	8206370	Little is known about the identity and involvement of single-stranded (ss) DNA-binding (SSB) and RNA-binding proteins in developmental processes that occur during oogenesis in Drosophila melanogaster (Dm). Here, we describe a molecular approach designed to identify such proteins by virtue of their ssDNA-binding activity. We have constructed a directional ovarian cDNA library and conducted expression cloning screens which identified five unique cDNAs that encode proteins capable of binding ssDNA. All five represent previously unreported sequences. The remainder of this paper focuses on one of these cDNAs which encodes a Dm protein displaying significant sequence homology to Escherichia coli ssDNA-binding protein (SSB, involved in DNA replication, repair and recombination), as well as eukaryotic SSBs isolated from the mitochondria (mt) of rats, frogs, humans and yeast. The deduced amino acid (aa) sequence of this 15.6-kDa protein, which we will refer to as Dm mtSSB, displays average identities of 38.3% with eukaryotic mtSSBs and 23.4% with bacterial SSBs. Gel retardation analysis with an affinity-purified GST fusion protein confirms that Dm mtSSB specifically binds ss, but not double stranded DNA. Dm mtSSB is encoded by a nuclear gene whose expression appears to be developmentally regulated. It is expressed as a single 600-nucleotide (nt) transcript during oogenesis and embryogenesis. A larger transcript of 1500 nt is prevalent in some later stages of Dm development.
91	NR	8313896	Phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3-kinase has an 85 kDa subunit (p85 alpha) which mediates its association with activated protein tyrosine kinase receptors through SH2 domains, and an 110 kDa subunit (p110) which has intrinsic catalytic activity. Here p85 alpha and a related protein p85 beta are shown to form stable complexes with recombinant p110 in vivo and in vitro. Using a panel of glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion proteins of the inter-SH2 region of p85, 104 amino acids were found to bind directly the p110 protein, while deletion mutants within this region further defined the binding site to a sequence of 35 amino acids. Transient expression of the mutant p85 alpha protein in mouse L cells showed it was unable to bind PI 3-kinase activity in vivo. Mapping of the complementary site of interaction on the p110 protein defined 88 amino acids in the N-terminal region of p110 which mediate the binding of this subunit to either the p85 alpha or the p85 beta proteins. The inter-SH2 region of p85 is predicted to be an independently folded module of a coiled-coil of two long anti-parallel alpha-helices. The predicted structure of p85 suggests a basis for the intersubunit interaction and the relevance of this interaction with respect to the regulation of the PI 3-kinase complex is discussed.
91	NR	8054880	The isolation, characterization, and expression of a novel cDNA encoding a Trypanosoma cruzi polypeptide (TcAc2), homologous to various small stress proteins and glutathione S-transferases, are described. The deduced amino-acid sequence revealed two domains sharing 27% identity and an additional 27% similarity to each other suggesting that the molecule may have evolved from a single domain by a process of gene duplication and fusion. The TcAc2 cDNA was subcloned into the pGEX-2T vector for expression in E coli. In vitro translation products of epimastigote mRNA, immunoprecipitated with anti-TXepi serum, showed a major radioactive band of 52 kDa. Immunoprecipitation of [35S]methionine labelled epimastigote and trypomastigote antigens after pulse chase experiments, using anti-TcAc2 fusion protein antibodies, showed that the protein is released into the culture medium. Moreover, Western blot analysis revealed a single band of 52 kDa with epimastigote, trypomastigote and amastigote antigens. Primary structure homology searches revealed that each TcAc2 domain contained within its N-terminus significant homology to Solanum tuberosum pathogenesis-related protein PR1, soybean heat shock protein 26-A, auxin regulated clone pCNT103 from Nicotiana tabacum and Drosophila melanogaster glutathione S-transferase 27 (GST27). This finding was supported by a comparison of hydrophobicity profiles of TcAc2 and these proteins. Most of them play a central role in protection mechanisms against stress. Based on the homology between TcAc2, glutathione S-transferases (GST) and small stress proteins, it is likely that the TcAc2 gene product may play a crucial role in parasite's adaptation to its microenvironment. These molecules could be considered as members of the GST superfamily, where the T cruzi protein may take a particular place because of its internal gene duplication.
92	DR	14612427	The gene encoding p53 mediates a major tumor suppression pathway that is frequently altered in human cancers. p53 function is kept at a low level during normal cell growth and is activated in response to various cellular stresses. The MDM2 oncoprotein plays a key role in negatively regulating p53 activity by either direct repression of p53 transactivation activity in the nucleus or promotion of p53 degradation in the cytoplasm. DNA damage and oncogenic insults, the two best-characterized p53-dependent checkpoint pathways, both activate p53 through inhibition of MDM2. Here we report that the human homologue of MDM2, HDM2, binds to ribosomal protein L11. L11 binds a central region in HDM2 that is distinct from the ARF binding site. We show that the functional consequence of L11-HDM2 association, like that with ARF, results in the prevention of HDM2-mediated p53 ubiquitination and degradation, subsequently restoring p53-mediated transactivation, accumulating p21 protein levels, and inducing a p53-dependent cell cycle arrest by canceling the inhibitory function of HDM2. Interference with ribosomal biogenesis by a low concentration of actinomycin D is associated with an increased L11-HDM2 interaction and subsequent p53 stabilization. We suggest that L11 functions as a negative regulator of HDM2 and that there might exist in vivo an L11-HDM2-p53 pathway for monitoring ribosomal integrity.
92	NR	14552858	There is spontaneous cure of a large portion of Ascaris suum 4th-stage larvae (L4) from the jejunum of infected pigs between 14 and 21 days after inoculation (DAI). Those L4 that remain in the jejunum continue to develop while those that have moved to the ileum are eventually expelled from the intestines. Although increases in intestinal mucosal mast cells and changes in local host immunity are coincidental with spontaneous cure, the population of L4 that continue to develop in the jejunum may counteract host protective mechanisms by the differential production of factors related to parasitism. To this end, a cDNA library was constructed from L4 isolated from pig jejunum at 21 DAI, and 93% of 1920 original clones containing a single amplicon in the range 400-1500 bp were verified by gel electrophoresis and printed onto glass slides for microarray analysis. Fluorescent probes were prepared from total RNA isolated from: (1) 3rd stage-larvae from lung at 7 DAI, (L3); (2) L4 from jejunum at 14 DAI (L4-14-J); (3) L4 from jejunum at 21 DAI (L4-21-J); (4) L4 from ileum at 21 DAI (L4-21-I, and; (5) adults (L5). Cy3-labeled L3, L4-14-J, L4-21-I and L5 cDNA, and Cy5-labeled L4-21-J cDNA were simultaneously used to screen the printed arrays containing the L4-21-J-derived cDNA library. Several clones showed consistent differential gene expression over two separate experiments and were grouped into 3 distinct transcription patterns. The data showed that sequences from muscle actin and myosin, ribosomal protein L11, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase and the flavoprotein subunit of succinate dehydrogenase were highly expressed in L4-21-J, but not in L4-21-I; as were a collection of un-annotated genes derived from a worm body wall-hypodermis library, and a testes germinal zone tissue library. These results suggest that only actively developing A. suum L4 are destined to parasitize the host and successfully neutralize host protective responses.
92	NR	12962325	The 60S ribosomal proteins were isolated from ribosomes of human placenta and separated by reversed phase HPLC. The fractions obtained were subjected to trypsin and Glu-C digestion and analyzed by mass fingerprinting (MALDI-TOF), MS/MS (ESI), and Edman sequencing. Forty-six large subunit proteins were found, 22 of which showed masses in accordance with the SwissProt database (June 2002) masses (proteins L6, L7, L9, L13, L15, L17, L18, L21, L22, L24, L26, L27, L30, L32, L34, L35, L36, L37, L37A, L38, L39, L41). Eleven (proteins L7, L10A, L11, L12, L13A, L23, L23A, L27A, L28, L29, and P0) resulted in mass changes that are consistent with N-terminal loss of methionine, acetylation, internal methylation, or hydroxylation. A loss of methionine without acetylation was found for protein L8 and L17. For nine proteins (L3, L4, L5, L7A, L10, L14, L19, L31, and L40), the molecular masses could not be determined. Proteins P1 and protein L3-like were not identified by the methods applied.
92	NR	12954336	Thiostrepton and micrococcin inhibit protein synthesis by binding to the L11 binding domain (L11BD) of 23S ribosomal RNA. The two compounds are structurally related, yet they produce different effects on ribosomal RNA in footprinting experiments and on elongation factor-G (EF-G)-dependent GTP hydrolysis. Using NMR and an assay based on A1067 methylation by thiostrepton-resistance methyltransferase, we show that the related thiazoles, nosiheptide and siomycin, also bind to this region. The effect of all four antibiotics on EF-G-dependent GTP hydrolysis and EF-G-GDP-ribosome complex formation was studied. Our NMR and biochemical data demonstrate that thiostrepton, nosiheptide, and siomycin share a common profile, which differs from that of micrococcin. We have generated a three-dimensional (3D) model for the interaction of thiostrepton with L11BD RNA. The model rationalizes the differences between micrococcin and the thiostrepton-like antibiotics interacting with L11BD.
92	NR	12852942	Rational structure-based drug design has been applied to the antibiotic thiostrepton, in an attempt to overcome some of its' limitations. The identification of a proposed binding fragment allowed construction of a number of key fragments, which were derivatised to generate a library of potential antibiotics. These were then evaluated to determine their ability to bind to the L11 binding domain of the prokaryotic ribosome and inhibit bacterial protein translation.
92	DR	12842086	The HDM2 protein plays an important role in regulating the stability and function of the p53 tumor suppressor protein. In this report, we show that the ribosomal protein L11 can interact with HDM2 and inhibit HDM2 function, thus leading to the stabilization and activation of p53. The inhibition of HDM2 activity by L11 shows some similarity to the previously described activity of ARF, and expression of either ARF or L11 can induce a p53 response. Enhancement of the interaction between endogenous L11 and HDM2 following treatment of cells with low levels of actinomycin-D suggests that the HDM2/L11 interaction represents a novel pathway for p53 stabilization in response to perturbations in ribosome biogenesis.
92	NR	12841582	The direct assays on Biacore with immobilised RRF and purified L11 from E. coli in the flow trough have shown unspecific binding between the both proteins. The interaction of RRF with GTPase domain of E. coli ribosomes, a functionally active complex of L11 with 23S r RNA and L10.(L7/L12)4 was studied by Biacore. In the experiments of binding of RRF with 30S, 50S and 70S ribosomes from E. coli were used the antibiotics thiostrepton, tetracycline and neomycin and factors, influencing the 70S dissociation Mg2+, NH4Cl, EDTA. The binding is strongly dependent from the concentrations of RRF, Mg2+, NH4Cl, EDTA and is inhibited by thiostrepton. The effect is most specific for 50S subunits and indicates that the GTPase centre can be considered as a possible site of interaction of RRF with the ribosome. We can consider an electrostatic character of the interactions with most probable candidate 16S and 23S r RNA at the interface of 30S and 50S ribosomal subunits.
92	NR	12818198	Ribosomal protein L11 consists of a C-terminal and an N-terminal domain. To determine the importance of each domain for interaction with release factor 1, which works specifically at the UAG termination codon, we constructed Escherichia coli strains lacking either the entire L11 protein or just the N-terminal portion. Strains lacking L11 exhibited UAG suppression, defective growth, and high-temperature lethality, phenotypes that were reversed by expression of L11 protein from a plasmid. Strains lacking only the N-terminal portion of L11 grew well at physiological temperatures and survived at high temperature, but they were defective in UAG-dependent termination. Our results show for the first time that it is precisely the N-terminal part of ribosomal protein L11 that is required for the functional interaction of release factor 1 with the ribosome in the cell.
92	NR	12815950	NA
92	NR	12777815	Ribosomal proteins are subjected to a variety of post-translational modifications, of which methylation is the most frequently found in all three kingdoms of life. PrmA is the only bacterial enzyme identified to date that catalyzes the methylation of a ribosomal protein. It is responsible for the introduction of nine methyl groups into the N-terminal domain of ribosomal protein L11. The PrmA protein from Thermus thermophilus HB8 was crystallized and a preliminary X-ray diffraction analysis was performed. A cryocooled crystal diffracted X-rays beyond 1.9 A using synchrotron radiation.
92	NR	12652127	NA
92	NR	12574130	Tet(O) is an elongation factor-like protein which confers resistance to the protein synthesis inhibitor tetracycline by promoting the release of the drug from its inhibitory site on the ribosome. Here we investigated the interaction of Tet(O) with the elongating ribosome and show, using dimethyl sulfate (DMS) probing and binding assays, that it interacts preferentially with the post-translocational ribosome. Furthermore, using an XTP-dependent mutant of Tet(O), we demonstrated that Tet(O) induces conformational rearrangements within the ribosome which can be detected by EF-Tu, and manifested as a stimulation in the GTPase activity of this elongation factor. As such, these conformational changes probably involve the ribosomal GTPase-associated center and, accordingly, Tet(O) alters the DMS modification pattern of the L11 region. Additionally, tetracycline binding is associated with an E(a) of 58 kJ/mol. These results suggest a model where both Tet(O) and tetracycline induce a conformational change in functionally opposite directions and the Tet(O)-induced conformation persists after it has left the ribosome; this prevents rebinding of the drug while allowing productive A-site occupation by a ternary complex in the presence of tetracycline.
92	NR	12427928	Antibiotic production in Streptomyces lividans can be activated by introducing certain mutations (rif) into the rpoB gene that confer resistance to rifampicin. Working with the most typical (rif-17) mutant strain, KO-417, the rif-17 mutation was characterized. The rif-17 mutation was shown to be responsible for activating antibiotic production and for reducing the growth rate of strain KO-417, as demonstrated by gene-replacement experiments. Gene-expression analysis revealed that introduction of rif into S. lividans elevates expression of the pathway-specific regulatory gene actII-ORF4 to nearly the same level seen in Streptomyces coelicolor. The rif effect on antibiotic production was still evident in the genetic background of relC, indicating that the rif mutation can provoke its effect without depending on ppGpp. Accompanying the restoration of antibiotic production, rif mutants also exhibited a lower rate of RNA synthesis compared to the parental strain when grown in a nutritionally rich medium, suggesting that the mutant RNA polymerases may behave like 'stringent' RNA polymerases. These results indicate that the rif mutation can alter the gene-expression pattern independent of ppGpp. The impaired growth of strain KO-417 (rif-17) was largely restored by introducing the second rif mutation (rif-18) just adjacent to the rif-17 position. Proteome analysis using two-dimensional PAGE revealed that the rif mutant strain KO-418 (rif-17 rif-18) displayed a temporal burst of expression especially of two enzymes, glutamine synthetase (type II) and oxidoreductase, during the late growth phase.
92	NR	12419222	During conditions of nutrient deprivation, ribosomes are blocked by uncharged tRNA at the A site. The stringent factor RelA binds to blocked ribosomes and catalyzes synthesis of (p)ppGpp, a secondary messenger that induces the stringent response. We demonstrate that binding of RelA and (p)ppGpp synthesis are inversely coupled, i.e., (p)ppGpp synthesis decreases the affinity of RelA for the ribosome. RelA binding to ribosomes is governed primarily by mRNA, but independently of ribosomal protein L11, while (p)ppGpp synthesis strictly requires uncharged tRNA at the A site and the presence of L11. A model is proposed whereby RelA hops between blocked ribosomes, providing an explanation for how low intracellular concentrations of RelA (1/200 ribosomes) can synthesize (p)ppGpp at levels that accurately reflect the starved ribosome population.
92	NR	12409297	We used mass spectrometry to identify proteins that are released in the gas phase from Escherichia coli ribosomes in response to a range of different solution conditions and cofactor binding. From solution at neutral pH the spectra are dominated by just 4 of the 54 ribosomal proteins (L7/L12, L11, and L10). Lowering the pH of the solution leads to the gas phase dissociation of four additional proteins as well as the 5 S RNA. Replacement of Mg(2+) by Li(+) ions in solutions of ribosomes induced the dissociation of 17 ribosomal proteins. Correlation of these results with available structural information for ribosomes revealed that a relatively high interaction surface area of the protein with RNA was the major force in preventing dissociation. By using the proteins that dissociate to probe their interactions with RNA, we examined different complexes of the ribosome formed with the elongation factor G and inhibited by fusidic acid or thiostrepton. Mass spectra recorded for the fusidic acid-inhibited complex reveal subtle changes in peak intensity of the proteins that dissociate. By contrast gas phase dissociation from the thiostrepton-inhibited complex is markedly different and demonstrates the presence of L5 and L18, two proteins that interact exclusively with the 5 S RNA. These results allow us to propose that the ribosome elongation factor-G complex inhibited by thiostrepton, but not fusidic acid, involves destabilization of 5 S RNA-protein interactions.
92	NR	12406702	Photolabile oligonucleotides (PHONTs) bind to rRNA sequences to which they are complementary and, on photolysis, incorporate into neighboring ribosomal components. Here we report on photocrosslinking results obtained with PHONTs targeting 23S rRNA nucleotides 1882-1892, in the long lateral arm of the 50S subunit (PHONT 1892), and 1085-1093, in the L11 binding domain (PHONT 1093). Photolysis of the PHONT 1892.50S and PHONT 1093.50S complexes leads to formation of 'long-range' crosslinks from C1892 to U1094/A1095 and G1950, and from G1093 to U1712/1716 and U1926, that are clearly incompatible with published crystal structures of 50S subunits. These results provide strong evidence that within the 50S subunit (a) the L11 binding domain can extend in an arm-like fashion, accessing large areas of the ribosome, and (b) the lateral arm can bend about the noncanonical helix at its center. Such motions may have functional relevance in identifying regions that undergo major conformational change as the ribosome moves through its catalytic cycle.
92	NR	12399485	Secretion of proteins by Helicobacter pylori may contribute to gastric inflammation and epithelial damage. An in vitro analysis was designed to identify proteins released by mechanisms other than nonspecific lysis. The radioactivity of proteins in the supernatant was compared with that of the intact organism by two-dimensional gel phosphorimaging following a 4-h pulse-chase. The ratio of the amount of UreB, a known cytoplasmic protein, in the supernatant to that in the pellet was found to be 0.25, and this was taken as an index of lysis during the experiments (n = 6). Ratios greater than that of UreB were used to distinguish proteins that were selectively released into the medium. Thus, proteins enriched more than 10-fold in the supernatant compared to UreB were identified by mass spectrometry. Sixteen such proteins were present in the supernatant: VacA; a conserved secreted protein (HP1286); putative peptidyl cis-trans isomerase (HP0175); six proteins encoded by HP0305, HP0231, HP0973, HP0721, HP0129, and HP0902; thioredoxin (HP1458); single-stranded-DNA-binding 12RNP2 precursor (HP0827); histone-like DNA-binding protein HU (HP0835); ribosomal protein L11 (HP1202); a putative outer membrane protein (HP1564); and outer membrane proteins Omp21 (HP0913) and Omp20 (HP0912). All except HP0902, thioredoxin, HP0827, HP0835, and HP1202 had a signal peptide. When nalidixic acid, a DNA synthesis inhibitor, was added to inhibit cell division but not protein synthesis, to decrease possible contamination due to outer membrane shedding, two outer membrane proteins (Omp21 and Omp20) disappeared from the supernatant, and the amount of VacA also decreased. Thus, 13 proteins were still enriched greater than 10-fold in the medium after nalidixic acid treatment, suggesting these were released specifically, possibly by secretion. These proteins may be implicated in H. pylori-induced effects on the gastric epithelium.
92	NR	12379845	The mRNA codon in the ribosomal A-site is recognized by aminoacyl-tRNA (aa-tRNA) in a ternary complex with elongation factor Tu (EF-Tu) and GTP. Here we report the 13 A resolution three-dimensional reconstruction determined by cryo-electron microscopy of the kirromycin-stalled codon-recognition complex. The structure of the ternary complex is distorted by binding of the tRNA anticodon arm in the decoding center. The aa-tRNA interacts with 16S rRNA, helix 69 of 23S rRNA and proteins S12 and L11, while the sarcin-ricin loop of 23S rRNA contacts domain 1 of EF-Tu near the nucleotide-binding pocket. These results provide a detailed snapshot view of an important functional state of the ribosome and suggest mechanisms of decoding and GTPase activation.
92	NR	12369843	The GTPase activity of elongation factors Tu and G is stimulated by the ribosome. The factor binding site is located on the 50S ribosomal subunit and comprises proteins L7/12, L10, L11, the L11-binding region of 23S rRNA, and the sarcin-ricin loop of 23S rRNA. The role of these ribosomal elements in factor binding, GTPase activation, or functions in tRNA binding and translocation, and their relative contributions, is not known. By comparing ribosomes depleted of L7/12 and reconstituted ribosomes, we show that, for both factors, interactions with L7/12 and with other ribosomal residues contribute about equally and additively to GTPase activation, resulting in an overall 10(7)-fold stimulation. Removal of L7/12 has little effect on factor binding to the ribosome. Effects on other factor-dependent functions, i.e., A-site binding of aminoacyl-tRNA and translocation, are fully explained by the inhibition of GTP hydrolysis. Based on these results, we propose that L7/12 stimulates the GTPase activity of both factors by inducing the catalytically active conformation of the G domain. This effect appears to be augmented by interactions of other structural elements of the large ribosomal subunit with the switch regions of the factors.
92	NR	12368261	Fragile X syndrome is a common form of inherited mental retardation caused by the loss of FMR1 expression. The FMR1 gene encodes an RNA-binding protein that associates with translating ribosomes and acts as a negative translational regulator. In Drosophila, the fly homolog of the FMR1 protein (dFMR1) binds to and represses the translation of an mRNA encoding of the microtuble-associated protein Futsch. We have isolated a dFMR1-associated complex that includes two ribosomal proteins, L5 and L11, along with 5S RNA. The dFMR1 complex also contains Argonaute2 (AGO2) and a Drosophila homolog of p68 RNA helicase (Dmp68). AGO2 is an essential component for the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), a sequence-specific nuclease complex that mediates RNA interference (RNAi) in Drosophila. We show that Dmp68 is also required for efficient RNAi. We further show that dFMR1 is associated with Dicer, another essential component of the RNAi pathway, and microRNAs (miRNAs) in vivo, suggesting that dFMR1 is part of the RNAi-related apparatus. Our findings suggest a model in which the RNAi and dFMR1-mediated translational control pathways intersect in Drosophila. Our findings also raise the possibility that defects in an RNAi-related machinery may cause human disease.
92	NR	12198134	Replacement of the L10.L7/L12 protein complex and L11 in Escherichia coli ribosomes with the respective rat counterparts P0.P1/P2 and eukaryotic L12 causes conversion of ribosomal specificity for elongation factors from prokaryotic elongation factor (EF)-Tu/EF-G to eukaryotic EF (eEF)-1alpha/eEF-2. Here we have investigated the effects of protein replacement on the structure and function of two rRNA domains around positions 1070 and 2660 (sarcin/ricin loop) of 23 S rRNA. Protein replacement at the 1070 region in E. coli 50 S subunits was demonstrated by chemical probing analysis. Binding of rat proteins to the 1070 region caused increased accessibility of the 2660 and 1070 regions to ligands for eukaryotic ribosomes: the ribotoxin pepocin for the 2660 region (E. coli numbering), anti-28 S autoantibody for the 1070 region, and eEF-2 for both regions. Moreover, binding of the E. coli L10.L7/L12 complex and L11 to the 1070 region was shown to be responsible for E. coli ribosomal accessibility to another ribotoxin, gypsophilin. Ribosomal proteins at the 1070 region appear to modulate the structures and functions of the 2660 and 1070 RNA regions in slightly different modes in prokaryotes and eukaryotes.
92	NR	12144780	We have determined the three-dimensional organization of ribosomal RNAs and proteins essential for minimal ribosome function. Comparative sequence analysis identifies regions of the ribosome that have been evolutionarily conserved, and the spatial organization of conserved domains is determined by mapping these onto structures of the 30S and 50S subunits determined by X-ray crystallography. Several functional domains of the ribosome are conserved in their three-dimensional organization in the Archaea, Bacteria, Eucaryotic nuclear, mitochondria and chloroplast ribosomes. In contrast, other regions from both subunits have shifted their position in three-dimensional space during evolution, including the L11 binding domain and the alpha-sarcin-ricin loop (SRL). We examined conserved bridge interactions between the two ribosomal subunits, giving an indication of which contacts are more significant. The tRNA contacts that are conserved were also determined, highlighting functional interactions as the tRNA moves through the ribosome during protein synthesis. To augment these studies of a large collection of comparative structural models sampled from all major branches on the phylogenetic tree, Caenorhabditis elegans mitochondrial rRNA is considered individually because it is among the smallest rRNA sequences known. The C.elegans model supports the large collection of comparative structure models while providing insight into the evolution of mitochondrial ribosomes.
92	NR	12060678	Acidic ribosomal phosphoproteins P0, P1 and P2 were isolated in soluble form from silkworm ribosomes and tested for their interactions with each other and with RNA fragments corresponding to the GTPase-associated domain of residues 1030-1127 (Escherichia coli numbering) in silkworm 28S rRNA in vitro. Mixing of P1 and P2 formed the P1-P2 heterodimer, as demonstrated by gel mobility shift and chemical crosslinking. This heterodimer, but neither P1 or P2 alone, tightly bound to P0 and formed a pentameric complex, presumably as P0(P1-P2)2, assumed from its molecular weight derived from sedimentation analysis. Complex formation strongly stimulated binding of P0 to the GTPase-associated RNA domain. The protein complex and eL12 (E.coli L11-type), which cross-bound to the E.coli equivalent RNA domain, were tested for their function by replacing with the E.coli counterparts L10.L7/L12 complex and L11 on the rRNA domain within the 50S subunits. Both P1 and P2, together with P0 and eL12, were required to activate ribosomes in polyphenylalanine synthesis dependent on eucaryotic elongation factors as well as eEF-2-dependent GTPase activity. The results suggest that formation of the P1-P2 heterodimer is required for subsequent formation of the P0(P1-P2)2 complex and its functional rRNA binding in silkworm ribosomes.
92	NR	12054794	The structure of a 58 nucleotide ribosomal RNA fragment buries several phosphate groups of a hairpin loop within a large tertiary core. During refinement of an X-ray crystal structure containing this RNA, a potassium ion was found to be contacted by six oxygen atoms from the buried phosphate groups; the ion is contained completely within the solvent-accessible surface of the RNA. The electrostatic potential at the ion chelation site is unusually large, and more than compensates for the substantial energetic penalties associated with partial dehydration of the ion and displacement of delocalized ions. The very large predicted binding free energy, approximately -30 kcal/mol, implies that the site must be occupied for the RNA to fold. These findings agree with previous studies of the ion-dependent folding of tertiary structure in this RNA, which concluded that a monovalent ion was bound in a partially dehydrated environment where Mg2+ could not easily compete for binding. By compensating the unfavorable free energy of buried phosphate groups with a chelated ion, the RNA is able to create a larger and more complex tertiary fold than would be possible otherwise. (c) 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd.
92	NR	12051934	The bacterial translational GTPases (initiation factor IF2, elongation factors EF-G and EF-Tu and release factor RF3) are involved in all stages of translation, and evidence indicates that they bind to overlapping sites on the ribosome, whereupon GTP hydrolysis is triggered. We provide evidence for a common ribosomal binding site for EF-G and IF2. IF2 prevents the binding of EF-G to the ribosome, as shown by Western blot analysis and fusidic acid-stabilized EF-G.GDP.ribosome complex formation. Additionally, IF2 inhibits EF-G-dependent GTP hydrolysis on 70 S ribosomes. The antibiotics thiostrepton and micrococcin, which bind to part of the EF-G binding site and interfere with the function of the factor, also affect the function of IF2. While thiostrepton is a strong inhibitor of EF-G-dependent GTP hydrolysis, GTP hydrolysis by IF2 is stimulated by the drug. Micrococcin stimulates GTP hydrolysis by both factors. We show directly that these drugs act by destabilizing the interaction of EF-G with the ribosome, and provide evidence that they have similar effects on IF2.
92	NR	12051910	Historically referred to as "the GTPase center", the L11 binding region (L11BR) of Escherichia coli 23 S rRNA is a highly conserved structure that has been implicated in several essential functions during protein synthesis. Here, in vivo expression of an RNA fragment containing that structure was found to affect translation termination in a codon-specific manner. The cause of these effects appeared to be titration of ribosomal protein L11, since normal phenotypes could be restored by simultaneous overproduction of wild-type L11 but not mutant L11. Subsequently, altered termination phenotypes were produced when the availability of L11 was limited by overexpression of RNA antisense to L11 mRNA and, finally, by inactivation of the chromosomal L11 gene, and they too were reversible by simultaneous expression of cloned L11. Our results indicate that in the intact cell the L11BR is an integral functional unit important for translation termination and that the presence of L11 in ribosomes is required for UAG-dependent termination and is somewhat inhibitory of UGA-dependent termination. Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd.
92	NR	12048200	Saccharomyces cerevisiae Rrs1p is a nuclear protein that is essential for the maturation of 25 S rRNA and the 60 S ribosomal subunit assembly. In two-hybrid screening, using RRS1 as bait, we have cloned YKR081c/RPF2. Rpf2p is essential for growth and is mainly localized in the nucleolus. The amino acid sequence of Rpf2p is highly conserved in eukaryotes from yeast to human. Similar to Rrs1p, Rpf2p shows physical interaction with ribosomal protein L11 and appears to associate with preribosomal subunits fairly tightly. Northern, methionine pulse-chase, and sucrose density gradient ultracentrifugation analyses reveal that the depletion of Rpf2p results in a delayed processing of pre-rRNA, a decrease of mature 25 S rRNA, and a shortage of 60 S subunits. An analysis of processing intermediates by primer extension shows that the Rpf2p depletion leads to an accumulation of 27 SB pre-rRNA, suggesting that Rpf2p is required for the processing of 27 SB into 25 S rRNA.
92	NR	11893754	A secretory defect leads to transcriptional repression of both ribosomal protein and rRNA genes in yeast. To elucidate the mechanism of the signaling, we previously isolated rrs mutants that were unable to respond to a secretory defect, and we cloned RRS1 encoding a nuclear protein that was required for ribosome biogenesis (Tsuno, A., Miyoshi, K., Tsujii, R., Miyakawa, T., and Mizuta, K. (2000) Mol. Cell. Biol. 20, 2066-2074). We identified duplicated genes encoding ribosomal protein L11, RPL11B as a wild-type allele complementing the rrs2 mutation, and RPL11A in two-hybrid screening using RRS1 as bait. Rpl11p was copurified with Rrs1p in immunoprecipitation analysis. Ultracentrifugation analysis revealed that Rrs1p associated fairly tightly with 60 S preribosomal subunits. These results suggest that signaling in response to a secretory defect requires the normal assembly of 60 S ribosomal subunits including Rrs1p and Rpl11p.
92	NR	11729183	Ribosomal L10-L7/L12 protein complex and L11 bind to a highly conserved RNA region around position 1070 in domain II of 23 S rRNA and constitute a part of the GTPase-associated center in Escherichia coli ribosomes. We replaced these ribosomal proteins in vitro with the rat counterparts P0-P1/P2 complex and RL12, and tested them for ribosomal activities. The core 50 S subunit lacking the proteins on the 1070 RNA domain was prepared under gentle conditions from a mutant deficient in ribosomal protein L11. The rat proteins bound to the core 50 S subunit through their interactions with the 1070 RNA domain. The resultant hybrid ribosome was insensitive to thiostrepton and showed poly(U)-programmed polyphenylalanine synthesis dependent on the actions of both eukaryotic elongation factors 1alpha (eEF-1alpha) and 2 (eEF-2) but not of the prokaryotic equivalent factors EF-Tu and EF-G. The results from replacement of either the L10-L7/L12 complex or L11 with rat protein showed that the P0-P1/P2 complex, and not RL12, was responsible for the specificity of the eukaryotic ribosomes to eukaryotic elongation factors and for the accompanying GTPase activity. The presence of either E. coli L11 or rat RL12 considerably stimulated the polyphenylalanine synthesis by the hybrid ribosome, suggesting that L11/RL12 proteins play an important role in post-GTPase events of translation elongation.
92	NR	11673421	Amino acid-deprived rplK (previously known as relC) mutants of Escherichia coli cannot activate (p)ppGpp synthetase I (RelA) and consequently exhibit relaxed phenotypes. The rplK gene encodes ribosomal protein L11, suggesting that L11 is involved in regulating the activity of RelA. To investigate the role of L11 in the stringent response, a derivative of rplK encoding L11 lacking the N-terminal 36 amino acids (designated 'L11) was constructed. Bacteria overexpressing 'L11 exhibited a relaxed phenotype, and this was associated with an inhibition of RelA-dependent (p)ppGpp synthesis during amino acid deprivation. In contrast, bacteria overexpressing normal L11 exhibited a typical stringent response. The overexpressed 'L11 was incorporated into ribosomes and had no effect on the ribosome-binding activity of RelA. By several methods (yeast two-hybrid, affinity blotting, and copurification), no direct interaction was observed between the C-terminal ribosome-binding domain of RelA and L11. To determine whether the proline-rich helix of L11 was involved in RelA regulation, the Pro-22 residue was replaced with Leu by site-directed mutagenesis. The overexpression of the Leu-22 mutant derivative of L11 resulted in a relaxed phenotype. These results indicate that the proline-rich helix in the N terminus of L11 is involved in regulating the activity of RelA.
92	NR	11574053	BACKGROUND: Ribosomal proteins are encoded in all genomes of cellular life forms and are, generally, well conserved during evolution. In prokaryotes, the genes for most ribosomal proteins are clustered in several highly conserved operons, which ensures efficient co-regulation of their expression. Duplications of ribosomal-protein genes are infrequent, and given their coordinated expression and functioning, it is generally assumed that ribosomal-protein genes are unlikely to undergo horizontal transfer. However, with the accumulation of numerous complete genome sequences of prokaryotes, several paralogous pairs of ribosomal protein genes have been identified. Here we analyze all such cases and attempt to reconstruct the evolutionary history of these ribosomal proteins. RESULTS: Complete bacterial genomes were searched for duplications of ribosomal proteins. Ribosomal proteins L36, L33, L31, S14 are each duplicated in several bacterial genomes and ribosomal proteins L11, L28, L7/L12, S1, S15, S18 are so far duplicated in only one genome each. Sequence analysis of the four ribosomal proteins, for which paralogs were detected in several genomes, two of the ribosomal proteins duplicated in one genome (L28 and S18), and the ribosomal protein L32 showed that each of them comes in two distinct versions. One form contains a predicted metal-binding Zn-ribbon that consists of four conserved cysteines (in some cases replaced by histidines), whereas, in the second form, these metal-chelating residues are completely or partially replaced. Typically, genomes containing paralogous genes for these ribosomal proteins encode both versions, designated C+ and C-, respectively. Analysis of phylogenetic trees for these seven ribosomal proteins, combined with comparison of genomic contexts for the respective genes, indicates that in most, if not all cases, their evolution involved a duplication of the ancestral C+ form early in bacterial evolution, with subsequent alternative loss of the C+ and C- forms in different lineages. Additionally, evidence was obtained for a role of horizontal gene transfer in the evolution of these ribosomal proteins, with multiple cases of gene displacement 'in situ', that is, without a change of the gene order in the recipient genome. CONCLUSIONS: A more complex picture of evolution of bacterial ribosomal proteins than previously suspected is emerging from these results, with major contributions of lineage-specific gene loss and horizontal gene transfer. The recurrent theme of emergence and disruption of Zn-ribbons in bacterial ribosomal proteins awaits a functional interpretation.
92	NR	11551941	Identification of all the protein components of the large subunit (39 S) of the mammalian mitochondrial ribosome has been achieved by carrying out proteolytic digestions of whole 39 S subunits followed by analysis of the resultant peptides by liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry. Peptide sequence information was used to search the human EST data bases and complete coding sequences were assembled. The human mitochondrial 39 S subunit has 48 distinct proteins. Twenty eight of these are homologs of the Escherichia coli 50 S ribosomal proteins L1, L2, L3, L4, L7/L12, L9, L10, L11, L13, L14, L15, L16, L17, L18, L19, L20, L21, L22, L23, L24, L27, L28, L30, L32, L33, L34, L35, and L36. Almost all of these proteins have homologs in Drosophila melanogaster, Caenorhabditis elegans, and Saccharomyces cerevisiae mitochondrial ribosomes. No mitochondrial homologs to prokaryotic ribosomal proteins L5, L6, L25, L29, and L31 could be found either in the peptides obtained or by analysis of the available data bases. The remaining 20 proteins present in the 39 S subunits are specific to mitochondrial ribosomes. Proteins in this group have no apparent homologs in bacterial, chloroplast, archaebacterial, or cytosolic ribosomes. All but two of the proteins has a clear homolog in D. melanogaster while all can be found in the genome of C. elegans. Ten of the 20 mitochondrial specific 39 S proteins have homologs in S. cerevisiae. Homologs of 2 of these new classes of ribosomal proteins could be identified in the Arabidopsis thaliana genome.
92	NR	11532164	The prpl11-1 mutant of Arabidopsis thaliana was identified among a collection of T-DNA tagged lines on the basis of a decrease in the effective quantum yield of photosystem II. The mutation responsible was localized to Prpl11, a single-copy nuclear gene that encodes PRPL11, a component of the large subunit of the plastid ribosome. The amino acid sequence of Arabidopsis PRPL11 is very similar to those of L11 proteins from spinach and prokaryotes. In the prpl11-1 mutant, photosensitivity and chlorophyll fluorescence parameters are significantly altered owing to changes in the levels of thylakoid protein complexes and stromal proteins. The abundance of most plastome transcripts examined, such as those of genes coding for the photosystem II core complex and RbcL, is not decreased. Plastid ribosomal RNA accumulates in wild-type amounts, and the assembly of plastid polysomes on the transcripts of the rbcL, psbA and psbE genes remains mainly unchanged in mutant plants, indicating that lack of PRPL11 affects neither the abundance of plastid ribosomes nor their assembly into polysomes. However, in vivo translation assays demonstrate that the rate of translation of the large subunit of Rubisco (RbcL) is significantly reduced in prpl11-1 plastids. Our data suggest a major role for PRPL11 in plastid ribosome activity per se, consistent with its location near the GTPase-binding centre of the chloroplast 50S ribosomal subunit. Additional effects of the mutation, including the pale green colour of the leaves and a drastic reduction in growth rate under greenhouse conditions, are compatible with reduced levels of protein synthesis in plastids.
92	NR	11519754	NA
92	NR	11518530	L11 protein is located at the base of the L7/L12 stalk of the 50 S subunit of the Escherichia coli ribosome. Because of the flexible nature of the region, recent X-ray crystallographic studies of the 50 S subunit failed to locate the N-terminal domain of the protein. We have determined the position of the complete L11 protein by comparing a three-dimensional cryo-EM reconstruction of the 70 S ribosome, isolated from a mutant lacking ribosomal protein L11, with the three-dimensional map of the wild-type ribosome. Fitting of the X-ray coordinates of L11-23 S RNA complex and EF-G into the cryo-EM maps combined with molecular modeling, reveals that, following EF-G-dependent GTP hydrolysis, domain V of EF-G intrudes into the cleft between the 23 S ribosomal RNA and the N-terminal domain of L11 (where the antibiotic thiostrepton binds), causing the N-terminal domain to move and thereby inducing the formation of the arc-like connection with the G' domain of EF-G. The results provide a new insight into the mechanism of EF-G-dependent translocation. Copyright 2001 Academic Press.
92	NR	11459176	We have cloned a cDNA for a ribosomal protein of wheat that is similar to the bacterial ribosomal protein L11 (RPL11). To determine the subcellular localization of the gene product, we fused the whole cDNA sequence to the coding sequence for Green Fluorescent Protein, and expressed the fusion product transiently in epidermal cells of pea hypocotyls or dayflower leaves. Localized fluorescence was detectable in mitochondria, indicating that this nuclear cDNA encodes a mitochondrial ribosomal protein L11 (MRPL11). In lower protists, mitochondrial RPL11 is encoded by the mitochondrial genome, but higher organisms, including animals, fungi and plants, do not have genes for RPL11 in their mitochondrial genomes, suggesting that transfer of the genetic information for RPL11 from the mitochondrial genome to the nucleus was a very early event in evolution. Transcripts of this wheat gene (TaMRPL11) for mitochondrial RPL11 were found in all tissues examined, although qualitative and quantitative differences in expression were noted. The transcript sizes were different in different plant tissues: 1.0 kb in flowers and roots, and 1.5 kb in shoots. Cold stress transiently increased the steady-state level of TaMRPL11 mRNA in shoots, but the transcription of TaMRPL11 was completely inhibited by cold treatment for longer periods. However, the transcript level in flowers decreased gradually on exposure to low temperature. On the other hand, the accumulation of TaMRPL11 transcripts in roots was not affected by low temperature. These results suggest that the expression of MRPL11 in wheat is regulated precisely, in a tissue-specific manner.
92	NR	11401698	Cell division normally follows the completion of each round of chromosome replication in Escherichia coli. Transcription of the essential cell division genes clustered at the mra region is shown here to depend on continuing chromosomal DNA replication. After chromosome replication was blocked by either nalidixic acid treatment or thymine starvation, the transcription of these cell division genes was repressed significantly. This suggests a way in which cell division is controlled by chromosome replication.
92	NR	11352582	A new computer program to annotate DNA and RNA three-dimensional structures, MC-Annotate, is introduced. The goals of annotation are to efficiently extract and manipulate structural information, to simplify further structural analyses and searches, and to objectively represent structural knowledge. The input of MC-Annotate is a PDB formatted DNA or RNA three-dimensional structure. The output of MC-Annotate is composed of a structural graph that contains the annotations, and a series of HTML documents, one for each nucleotide conformation and base-base interaction present in the input structure. The atomic coordinates of all nucleotides and the homogeneous transformation matrices of all base-base interactions are stored in the structural graph. Symbolic classifications of nucleotide conformations, using sugar puckering modes and nitrogen base orientations around the glycosyl bond, and base-base interactions, using stacking and hydrogen bonding information, are introduced. Peculiarity factors of nucleotide conformations and base-base interactions are defined to indicate their marginalities with all other examples. The peculiarity factors allow us to identify irregular regions and possible stereochemical errors in 3-D structures without interactive visualization. The annotations attached to each nucleotide conformation include its class, its torsion angles, a distribution of the root-mean-square deviations with examples of the same class, the list of examples of the same class, and its peculiarity value. The annotations attached to each base-base interaction include its class, a distribution of distances with examples of the same class, the list of examples of the same class, and its peculiarity value. The distance between two homogeneous transformation matrices is evaluated using a new metric that distinguishes between the rotation and the translation of a transformation matrix in the context of nitrogen bases. MC-Annotate was used to build databases of nucleotide conformations and base-base interactions. It was applied to the ribosomal RNA fragment that binds to protein L11, which annotations revealed peculiar nucleotide conformations and base-base interactions in the regions where the RNA contacts the protein. The question of whether the current database of RNA three-dimensional structures is complete is addressed. Copyright 2001 Academic Press.
92	NR	11319098	A cluster of six genes, tRNA(Trp)-secE-nusG-rplK-rplA-pkwR, was cloned and sequenced from a Corynebacterium glutamicum cosmid library and shown to be contiguous in the C. glutamicum genome. These genes encode a tryptophanyl tRNA, the protein translocase component SecE, the antiterminator protein NusG, and the ribosomal proteins L11 and L1 in addition to PkwR, a putative regulatory protein of the LacI-GalR family. S1 nuclease mapping analysis revealed that nusG and rplK are expressed as separate transcriptional units and rplK and rplA are cotranscribed as a single mRNA. A 19-nucleotide inverted repeat that appears to correspond to a transcriptional terminator was located in the 3' region downstream from nusG. Northern analysis with different probes confirmed the S1 mapping results and showed that the secE-rplA four-gene region gives rise to four transcripts. secE was transcribed as a 0.5-kb monocistronic mRNA, nusG formed two transcripts of 1.4 and 1.0 kb from different initiation sites, and the two ribosomal protein genes rplK and rplA were cotranscribed as a single mRNA of 1.6 kb. A consensus L1 protein binding sequence was identified in the leader region of the rplK-rplA transcript, suggesting that expression of the rplK-rplA cluster was regulated by autogenous regulation exerted by the L1 protein at the translation level. The promoters of the nusG and rplK-rplA genes were subcloned in a novel corynebacterial promoter-probe vector and shown to confer strong expression of the reporter gene.
92	NR	11278411	The Escherichia coli ribosomal protein L7/L12 is central to the translocation step of translation, and it is known to be flexible under some conditions. The assignment of electron density to L7/L12 was not possible in the recent 2.4 A resolution x-ray crystallographic structure (Ban, N., Nissen, P., Hansen, J., Moore, P. B., and Steitz, T. A. (2000) Science 289, 905-920). We have localized the two dimers of L7/L12 within the structure of the 70 S ribosome using two reconstitution approaches together with cryo-electron microscopy and single particle reconstruction. First, the structures were determined for ribosomal cores from which protein L7/L12 had been removed by treatment with NH(4)Cl and ethanol and for reconstituted ribosomes in which purified L7/L12 had been restored to core particles. Difference mapping revealed that the reconstituted ribosomes had additional density within the L7/L12 shoulder next to protein L11. Second, ribosomes were reconstituted using an L7/L12 variant in which a single cysteine at position 89 in the C-terminal domain was modified with Nanogold (Nanoprobes, Inc.), a 14 A gold derivative. The reconstruction from cryo-electron microscopy images and difference mapping placed the gold at four interfacial positions. The finding of multiple sites for the C-terminal domain of L7/L12 suggests that the conformation of this protein may change during the steps of elongation and translocation.
92	NR	11276255	RNA molecules fold into specific three-dimensional shapes to perform structural and catalytic functions. Large RNAs can form compact globular structures, but the chemical basis for close helical packing within these molecules has been unclear. Analysis of transfer, catalysis, in vitro-selected and ribosomal RNAs reveal that helical packing predominantly involves the interaction of single-stranded adenosines with a helix minor groove. Using the Tetrahymena thermophila group I ribozyme, we show here that the near-perfect shape complementarity between the adenine base and the minor groove allows for optimal van der Waals contacts, extensive hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic surface burial, creating a highly energetically favorable interaction. Adenosine is recognized in a chemically similar fashion by a combination of protein and RNA components in the ribonucleoprotein core of the signal recognition particle. These results provide a thermodynamic explanation for the noted abundance of conserved adenosines within the unpaired regions of RNA secondary structures.
92	PR	11274422	CD4(+) T lymphocyte clones, generated from mice immunized with the methylcholanthrene-induced fibrosarcoma Meth A (H-2(d)), are restricted by I-E(d) and recognize a unique antigen on Meth A. The antigen has been purified and characterized as the ribosomal protein L11. The antigenic epitope is contained within the sequence EYELRKHNFSDTG and is generated by substitution of Asn by His (italic) caused by a single point mutation. The tumor contains the wild-type and the mutated alleles. Immunization of BALB/cJ mice with the mutated epitope but not with the wild-type epitope protects mice against a subsequent challenge with the Meth A sarcoma. Adoptive transfer of CD4(+) clones into BALB/c mice renders the mice specifically resistant to Meth A sarcoma. The mutated L11 epitope is thus shown to be an immunoprotective epitope in vivo by several criteria.
92	NR	11244072	sigma(B), the general stress response sigma factor of Bacillus subtilis, is activated when the cell's energy levels decline or the bacterium is exposed to environmental stress (e.g., heat shock, ethanol). Physical stress activates sigma(B) through a collection of regulatory kinases and phosphatases (the Rsb proteins) which catalyze the release of sigma(B) from an anti-sigma(B) factor inhibitor. The means by which diverse stresses communicate with the Rsb proteins is unknown; however, a role for the ribosome in this process was suggested when several of the upstream members of the sigma(B) stress activation cascade (RsbR, -S, and -T) were found to cofractionate with ribosomes in crude B. subtilis extracts. We now present evidence for the involvement of a ribosome-mediated process in the stress activation of sigma(B). B. subtilis strains resistant to the antibiotic thiostrepton, due to the loss of ribosomal protein L11 (RplK), were found to be blocked in the stress activation of sigma(B). Neither the energy-responsive activation of sigma(B) nor stress-dependent chaperone gene induction (a sigma(B)-independent stress response) was inhibited by the loss of L11. The Rsb proteins required for stress activation of sigma(B) are shown to be active in the RplK(-) strain but fail to be triggered by stress. The data demonstrate that the B. subtilis ribosomes provide an essential input for the stress activation of sigma(B) and suggest that the ribosomes may themselves be the sensors for stress in this system.
92	NR	11154066	The total protein mixture from the 50S subunit (TP-50) of the eubacterium Thermus thermophilus was characterized after blotting onto PVDF membranes from two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (2D-PAGE) and sequencing. The proteins were numbered according to their primary structure similarity with their counterparts from other species. One of them has been marked with an asterisk, namely L*23, because unlike the other known ribosomal proteins it shows a very low degree of homology. A highly acidic 5S rRNA binding protein, TL5, was characterized and compared with the available primary structure information. Proteins L1 and L4 migrate similarly on 2D-PAGE. Protein L4, essential for protein biosynthesis, is N-terminally blocked and shows a strikingly low homology to other L4 proteins. In addition to L4, two other proteins, namely L10 and L11, were found to be N-terminally blocked. In conclusion, 33 proteins from the large subunit were identified, including TL5. Homologs to rpL25 and rpL26 were not found.
92	NR	11100899	We have analysed the expression of 32 ribosomal protein (RP) mRNAs during retinoic acid induced neuronal differentiation of human NTERA2 cells. Except for a new S27 variant (S27v), all were down regulated both in selectively replated differentiated neurons and the most differentiated continuous cultures, i.e., non-replated cultures. However, the expression profiles of the individual RP mRNAs were different, most (L3, L7, L8, L10, L13, L23a, L27a, L36a, L39, P0, S2, S3, S3a, S4X, S6, S9, S12, S13, S16, S19, S20, S23, and S27a) exhibited a constant down regulation, whereas a few were either initially constant (L11, L32, S8, and S11) or up regulated (L6, L15, L17, L31, and S27y) and then down regulated. The expression of S27v remained elevated in the most differentiated continuous cultures but was down regulated in replated differentiated neurons. The down regulation of RP mRNAs was variable: the expression levels in differentiated replated neurons were between 10% (S3) and 90% (S11) of the levels in undifferentiated cells. The ratio between rRNA and RP mRNA changed during the differentiation; in differentiated neurons there were, on average, about half the number of RP mRNAs per rRNA as compared to undifferentiated cells. The expression profiles of a few translation-related proteins were also determined. EF1alpha1, EF1beta1, and EF1delta were down regulated, whereas the expression of the neuron and muscle specific EF1alpha2 increased. The reduction in the expression of RP mRNAs was coordinated with a reduction in the expression level of the proliferation marker PCNA. The expression levels of most RP mRNAs were lower in purified differentiated post-mitotic neurons than in the most differentiated continuous cultures, despite similar levels of PCNA, suggesting that both the differentiation state and the proliferative status of the cells affect the expression of RP mRNAs.
92	NR	11071938	The yeast ribosomal GTPase associated center is made of parts of the 26S rRNA domains II and VI, and a number of proteins including P0, P1alpha, P1beta, P2alpha, P2beta and L12. Mapping of the rRNA neighborhood of the proteins was performed by footprinting in ribosomes from yeast strains lacking different GTPase components. The absence of protein P0 dramatically increases the sensitivity of the defective ribosome to degradation hampering the RNA footprinting. In ribosomes lacking the P1/P2 complex, protection of a number of nucleotides is detected around positions 840, 880, 1100, 1220-1280 and 1350 in domain II as well as in several positions in the domain VI alpha-sarcin region. The protection pattern resembles the one reported for the interaction of elongation factors in bacterial systems. The results exclude a direct interaction of these proteins with the rRNA and are compatible with an increase in the ribosome affinity for EF-2 in the absence of the acidic P proteins. Interestingly, a sordarin derivative inhibitor of EF-2 causes an opposite effect, increasing the reactivity in positions protected by the absence of P1/P2. Similarly, a deficiency in protein L12 exposes nucleotides G1235, G1242, A1262, A1269, A1270 and A1272 to chemical modification, thus situating the protein binding site in the most conserved part of the 26S rRNA, equivalent to the bacterial protein L11 binding site.
92	NR	11071906	In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the 60S ribosomal subunit assembles in the nucleolus and then is exported to the cytoplasm, where it joins the 40S subunit for translation. Export of the 60S subunit from the nucleus is known to be an energy-dependent and factor-mediated process, but very little is known about the specifics of its transport. To begin to address this problem, an assay was developed to follow the localization of the 60S ribosomal subunit in S. cerevisiae. Ribosomal protein L11b (Rpl11b), one of the approximately 45 ribosomal proteins of the 60S subunit, was tagged at its carboxyl terminus with the green fluorescent protein (GFP) to enable visualization of the 60S subunit in living cells. A panel of mutant yeast strains was screened for their accumulation of Rpl11b-GFP in the nucleus as an indicator of their involvement in ribosome synthesis and/or transport. This panel included conditional alleles of several rRNA-processing factors, nucleoporins, general transport factors, and karyopherins. As predicted, conditional alleles of rRNA-processing factors that affect 60S ribosomal subunit assembly accumulated Rpl11b-GFP in the nucleus. In addition, several of the nucleoporin mutants as well as a few of the karyopherin and transport factor mutants also mislocalized Rpl11b-GFP. In particular, deletion of the previously uncharacterized karyopherin KAP120 caused accumulation of Rpl11b-GFP in the nucleus, whereas ribosomal protein import was not impaired. Together, these data further define the requirements for ribosomal subunit export and suggest a biological function for KAP120.
92	NR	10997488	The Escherichia coli PrmA enzyme catalyzes methylation of the large ribosomal subunit protein L11. Database homology searches, multiple sequence alignment, and structure prediction allowed to dissect the primary structure of PrmA into two domains and assign putative functional or structural roles to invariant or highly conserved residues. Evolutionary relationships within the PrmA family were also analyzed. The topology of the branching order agrees to a large extent with the consensus phylogeny of Eubacteria, with the exception of beta and epsilon subdivisions of Proteobacteria, which most probably had their original prmA genes replaced by copies acquired via the lateral gene transfer from gamma-Proteobacteria and some close relative of the ancestor of gramnegative bacteria, respectively.
92	NR	10960474	The GTPase-associated center in 23/28 S rRNA is one of the most conserved functional domains throughout all organisms. We detected a unique sequence of this domain in Bombyx mori species in which the bases at positions 1094 and 1098 (numbering from Escherichia coli 23 S rRNA) are C and G instead of the otherwise universally conserved bases U and A, respectively. These changes were also observed in four other species of moths, but not in organisms other than the moths. Characteristics of the B. mori rRNA domain were investigated by native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis using RNA fragments containing residues 1030-1128. Although two bands of protein-free RNA appeared on gel, they shifted to a single band when bound to Bombyx ribosomal proteins Bm-L12 and Bm-P complex, equivalent to E. coli L11 and L8, respectively. Bombyx RNA showed lower binding capacity than rat RNA for the ribosomal proteins and anti-28 S autoantibody, specific for a folded structure of the eukaryotic GTPase-associated domain. When the C(1094)/G(1098) bases in Bombyx RNA were replaced by the conserved U/A bases, the protein-free RNA migrated as a single band, and the complex formation with Bm-L12, Bm-P complex, and anti-28 S autoantibody was comparable to that of rat RNA. The results suggest that the GTPase-associated domain of moth-type insects has a labile structural feature that is caused by an unusual covariant change of the U(1094)/A(1098) bases to C/G.
92	NR	10889993	NA
92	NR	10874046	We have completed identification of all the ribosomal proteins (RPs) in spinach plastid (chloroplast) ribosomal 50 S subunit via a proteomic approach using two-dimensional electrophoresis, electroblotting/protein sequencing, high performance liquid chromatography purification, polymerase chain reaction-based screening of cDNA library/nucleotide sequencing, and mass spectrometry (reversed-phase HPLC coupled to electrospray ionization mass spectrometry and electrospray ionization mass spectrometry). Spinach plastid 50 S subunit comprises 33 proteins, of which 31 are orthologues of Escherichia coli RPs and two are plastid-specific RPs (PSRP-5 and PSRP-6) having no homologues in other types of ribosomes. Orthologues of E. coli L25 and L30 are absent in spinach plastid ribosome. 25 of the plastid 50 S RPs are encoded in the nuclear genome and synthesized on cytosolic ribosomes, whereas eight of the plastid RPs are encoded in the plastid organelle genome and synthesized on plastid ribosomes. Sites for transit peptide cleavages in the cytosolic RP precursors and formyl Met processing in the plastid-synthesized RPs were established. Post-translational modifications were observed in several mature plastid RPs, including multiple forms of L10, L18, L31, and PSRP-5 and N-terminal/internal modifications in L2, L11 and L16. Comparison of the RPs in gradient-purified 70 S ribosome with those in the 30 and 50 S subunits revealed an additional protein, in approximately stoichiometric amount, specific to the 70 S ribosome. It was identified to be plastid ribosome recycling factor. Combining with our recent study of the proteins in plastid 30 S subunit (Yamaguchi, K., von Knoblauch, K., and Subramanian, A. R. (2000) J. Biol. Chem. 275, 28455-28465), we show that spinach plastid ribosome comprises 59 proteins (33 in 50 S subunit and 25 in 30 S subunit and ribosome recycling factor in 70 S), of which 53 are E. coli orthologues and 6 are plastid-specific proteins (PSRP-1 to PSRP-6). We propose the hypothesis that PSRPs were evolved to perform functions unique to plastid translation and its regulation, including protein targeting/translocation to thylakoid membrane via plastid 50 S subunit.
92	NR	10801497	BACKGROUND: Bacterial signal recognition particle (SRP), consisting of 4.5S RNA and Ffh protein, plays an essential role in targeting signal-peptide-containing proteins to the secretory apparatus in the cell membrane. The 4.5S RNA increases the affinity of Ffh for signal peptides and is essential for the interaction between SRP and its receptor, protein FtsY. The 4.5S RNA also interacts with elongation factor G (EF-G) in the ribosome and this interaction is required for efficient translation. RESULTS: We have determined by multiple anomalous dispersion (MAD) with Lu(3+) the 2.7 A crystal structure of a 4.5S RNA fragment containing binding sites for both Ffh and EF-G. This fragment consists of three helices connected by a symmetric and an asymmetric internal loop. In contrast to NMR-derived structures reported previously, the symmetric loop is entirely constituted by non-canonical base pairs. These pairs continuously stack and project unusual sets of hydrogen-bond donors and acceptors into the shallow minor groove. The structure can therefore be regarded as two double helical rods hinged by the asymmetric loop that protrudes from one strand. CONCLUSIONS: Based on our crystal structure and results of chemical protection experiments reported previously, we predicted that Ffh binds to the minor groove of the symmetric loop. An identical decanucleotide sequence is found in the EF-G binding sites of both 4.5S RNA and 23S rRNA. The decanucleotide structure in the 4.5S RNA and the ribosomal protein L11-RNA complex crystals suggests how 4.5S RNA and 23S rRNA might interact with EF-G and function in translating ribosomes.
92	NR	10756104	The Escherichia coli 23 S and 5 S rRNA molecules have been fitted helix by helix to a cryo-electron microscopic (EM) reconstruction of the 50 S ribosomal subunit, using an unfiltered version of the recently published 50 S reconstruction at 7.5 A resolution. At this resolution, the EM density shows a well-defined network of fine structural elements, in which the major and minor grooves of the rRNA helices can be discerned at many locations. The 3D folding of the rRNA molecules within this EM density is constrained by their well-established secondary structures, and further constraints are provided by intra and inter-rRNA crosslinking data, as well as by tertiary interactions and pseudoknots. RNA-protein cross-link and foot-print sites on the 23 S and 5 S rRNA were used to position the rRNA elements concerned in relation to the known arrangement of the ribosomal proteins as determined by immuno-electron microscopy. The published X-ray or NMR structures of seven 50 S ribosomal proteins or RNA-protein complexes were incorporated into the EM density. The 3D locations of cross-link and foot-print sites to the 23 S rRNA from tRNA bound to the ribosomal A, P or E sites were correlated with the positions of the tRNA molecules directly observed in earlier reconstructions of the 70 S ribosome at 13 A or 20 A. Similarly, the positions of cross-link sites within the peptidyl transferase ring of the 23 S rRNA from the aminoacyl residue of tRNA were correlated with the locations of the CCA ends of the A and P site tRNA. Sites on the 23 S rRNA that are cross-linked to the N termini of peptides of different lengths were all found to lie within or close to the internal tunnel connecting the peptidyl transferase region with the presumed peptide exit site on the solvent side of the 50 S subunit. The post-transcriptionally modified bases in the 23 S rRNA form a cluster close to the peptidyl transferase area. The minimum conserved core elements of the secondary structure of the 23 S rRNA form a compact block within the 3D structure and, conversely, the points corresponding to the locations of expansion segments in 28 S rRNA all lie on the outside of the structure. Copyright 2000 Academic Press.
92	NR	10734197	Antibiotics that inhibit ribosomal function may do so by one of several mechanisms, including the induction of incorrect RNA folding or prevention of protein and/or RNA conformational transitions. Thiostrepton, which binds to the 'GTPase center' of the large subunit, has been postulated to prevent conformational changes in either the L11 protein or rRNA to which it binds. Scintillation proximity assays designed to look at the binding of the L11 C-terminal RNA-binding domain to a 23S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) fragment, as well as the ability of thiostrepton to induce that binding, were used to demonstrate the role of Mg(2+), L11 and thio-strepton in the formation and maintenance of the rRNA fragment tertiary structure. Experiments using these assays with both an Escherichia coli rRNA fragment and a thermostable variant of that RNA show that Mg(2+), L11 and thiostrepton all induce the RNA to fold to an essentially identical tertiary structure.
92	NR	10623547	The C-terminal domain of ribosomal protein L11, L11-C76, binds in the distorted minor groove of a helix within a 58 nucleotide domain of 23 S rRNA. To study the electrostatic component of RNA recognition in this protein, arginine and lysine residues have been individually mutated to alanine or methionine residues at the nine sequence positions that are conserved as basic residues among bacterial L11 homologs. In measurements of the salt dependence of RNA-binding, five of these mutants have a reduced value of - partial differentiallog(K(obs))/ partial differentiallog[KCl] as compared to the parent L11-C76 sequence, indicating that these residues interact with the RNA electrostatic field. These five residues are located at the perimeter of the RNA-binding surface of the protein; all five of them form salt bridges with phosphates in the crystal structure of the complex. A sixth residue, Lys47, was found to make an electrostatic contribution to binding when measurements were made at pH 6.0, but not at pH 7.0; its pK in the free protein must be <6.5. The unusual behavior of Lys47 is explained by its burial in the hydrophobic core of the free protein, and unburial in the RNA-bound protein, where it forms a salt bridge with a phosphate. The contributions of these six residues to the electrostatic component of binding are not additive; thus the magnitude of the salt dependence cannot be used to count the number of ionic interactions in this complex. By interacting with irregular features of the RNA backbone, including an S-turn, these basic residues contribute to the specificity of L11 for its target site. Copyright 2000 Academic Press.
92	NR	10550541	Starvation for amino acids initiates the developmental cycle in the cellular slime mold, Dictyostelium discoideum. Upon starvation one of the earliest developmental events is the selective loss of the ribosomal protein mRNAs from polysomes. This loss depends upon sequences in the 5' non-translated leader of the ribosomal protein (r-protein) mRNAs. Here evidence is presented which indicates that those cells which will become prestalk cells express the ribosomal protein genes during development under starvation conditions. Cells which enter the prespore pathway shut off r-protein synthesis. The promoter and 5' non-translated leader sequences from two ribosomal protein genes, the rp-L11 and the rp-S9 genes, are fused to the Escherichia coli beta-galactosidase reporter gene. While beta-galactosidase enzyme activity is detected in situ in most growing cells, by 15 h of development beta-galactosidase enzyme activity is largely lost from the prespore cells although strong beta-galactosidase enzyme activity is present in the prestalk cells. These observations suggest the possibility that the ribosomal protein mRNAs are excluded from polysomes in a cell-type-specific manner.
92	NR	10544808	NA
92	NR	10518301	The dnaK gene region of Bacillus sphaericus was cloned as a 3.8 kb HindIII fragment and an overlapping 1.7 kb EcoRI fragment by using an internal B. sphaericus specific dnaK gene probe generated by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Complete DNA sequencing of the two fragments revealed three complete open reading frames (ORFs). These ORFs exhibited a high degree of identity to the grpE dnaK, and dnaJ heat shock genes from other gram-positive bacteria. The order of the genes was found to be grpE-dnaK-dnaJ. Additionally, the 5'-end and 3'-end contained amino acid sequences that were homologous to the C-terminal sequence of the hrcA gene and the N-terminal sequence of ORF35 (yqeT), respectively, from Bacillus subtilis. The entire hrcA gene from B. sphaericus was then isolated by high-fidelity PCR and completely sequenced. A transcription stop site is located between the dnaK and dnaJ genes but not after the dnaJ gene. Consistent with this observation, the dnaJ gene is immediately followed by an ORF that shows a high degree of identity to ORF35 from B. subtilis, Staphylococcus aureus, and Clostridium acetobutylicum. The presence of ORF35 is not indicated in other genera representing the gram-positive bacteria. The amino acid sequence of ORF35 exhibited nearly 30% identity with the methyltransferase for large subunit ribosomal protein L11 from gram-negative Proteobacteria and the related protein from cyanobacteria, other gram-negative bacteria, and Archaea, suggesting the presence of the gene for this protein in the common ancestor of Bacteria and Archaea. The absence of the ORF35 gene in Mycobacterium tuberculosis and other gram-positive bacteria indicates that the loss of this gene must have occurred in an ancestor of other gram-positive bacteria following their divergence from the ancestor of Bacillus/Clostridium/staphylococcus lineage.
92	NR	10476961	NA
92	NR	10430567	The mechanisms for the control of ribosomal protein synthesis have been characterized in detail in Eukarya and in Bacteria. In Archaea, only the regulation of the MvaL1 operon (encoding ribosomal proteins MvaL1, MvaL10, and MvaL12) of the mesophilic Methanococcus vannielii has been extensively investigated. As in Bacteria, regulation takes place at the level of translation. The regulator protein MvaL1 binds preferentially to its binding site on the 23S rRNA, and, when in excess, binds to the regulatory target site on its mRNA and thus inhibits translation of all three cistrons of the operon. The regulatory binding site on the mRNA, a structural mimic of the respective binding site on the 23S rRNA, is located within the structural gene about 30 nucleotides downstream of the ATG start codon. MvaL1 blocks a step before or at the formation of the first peptide bond of MvaL1. Here we demonstrate that a similar regulatory mechanism exists in the thermophilic M. thermolithotrophicus and M. jannaschii. The L1 gene is cotranscribed together with the L10 and L11 gene, in all genera of the Euryarchaeota branch of the Archaea studied so far. A potential regulatory L1 binding site located within the structural gene, as in Methanococcus, was found in Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum and in Pyrococcus horikoshii. In contrast, in Archaeoglobus fulgidus a typical L1 binding site is located in the untranslated leader of the L1 gene as described for the halophilic Archaea. In Sulfolobus, a member of the Crenarchaeota, the L1 gene is part of a long transcript (encoding SecE, NusG, L11, L1, L10, L12). A previously suggested regulatory L1 target site located within the L11 structural gene could not be confirmed as an L1 binding site.
92	NR	10400812	Poliovirus infection induces an overall inhibition of host protein synthesis, although some mRNAs continue to be translated, suggesting different translation requirements for cellular mRNAs. It is known that ribosomal protein mRNAs are translationally regulated and that the phosphorylation of ribosomal protein S6 is involved in the regulation. Here, we report that the translation of ribosomal protein mRNAs resists poliovirus infection and correlates with an increase in p70(s6k) activity and phosphorylation of ribosomal protein S6.
92	NR	10366501	Ribosomal protein L11 is a highly conserved protein that has been implicated in binding of elongation factors to ribosomes and associated GTP hydrolysis. Here, we have analyzed the ribosomal RNA neighborhood of Escherichia coli L11 in 50 S subunits by directed hydroxyl radical probing from Fe(II) tethered to five engineered cysteine residues at positions 19, 84, 85, 92 and 116 via the linker 1-(p -bromoacetamidobenzyl)-EDTA. Correct assembly of the L11 derivatives was analyzed by incorporating the modified proteins into 50 S subunits isolated from an E. coli strain that lacks L11 and testing for previously characterized L11-dependent footprints in domain II of 23 S rRNA. Hydroxyl radicals were generated from Fe(II) tethered to L11 and sites of cleavage in the ribosomal RNA were detected by primer extension. Strong cleavages were detected within the previously described binding site of L11, in the 1100 region of 23 S rRNA. Moreover, Fe(II) tethered to position 19 in L11 targeted the backbone of the sarcin loop in domain VI while probing from position 92 cleaved the backbone around bases 900 and 2470 in domains II and V, respectively. Fe(II) tethered to positions 84, 85 and 92 also generated cleavages in 5 S rRNA around helix II. These data provide new information about the positions of specific features of 23 S rRNA and 5 S rRNA relative to protein L11 in the 50 S subunit and show that L11 is near highly conserved elements of the rRNA that have been implicated in binding of tRNA and elongation factors to the ribosome. Copyright 1999 Academic Press.
92	DR	10353821	Bleomycin hydrolase (BH) is a cysteine proteinase that inactivates the anticancer drug bleomycin. Yeast BH forms a homohexameric structure that resembles a 20S proteasome and binds to single-stranded RNA and DNA. We now demonstrate that human BH (hBH) interacts and colocalizes with ribosomal proteins. Using a yeast two-hybrid system, we found hBH bound to human homologues of rat ribosomal proteins L11 and L29. The N-terminus of hBH (amino acids 14-175), which contains a catalytic Cys93, was critical for the binding to L11 in the two-hybrid environment. hBH precipitated 35S-labeled L11 and L29 in vitro, and hBH colocalized with L11 and L29 as determined by immunofluorescence. In addition to cytosolic bleomycin hydrolase, we found abundant bleomycin hydrolase activity associated with the ribosomal subcellular fraction by differential centrifugation. hBH was also detected by Western immunoblotting in a high-speed particulate fraction, where the majority of L11 and L29 were found. In vitro experiments showed recombinant hBH binds to Chinese hamster ovary cell microsomes. Thus, our data strongly suggest that hBH exists as both a free cytosolic and ribosome-associated protein.
92	NR	10343117	NA
92	NR	10338213	NA
92	NR	10338205	NA
92	NR	10333296	The L11 ribosomal protein from Thermus thermophilus (TthL11) has been overproduced and purified to homogeneity using a two-step purification protocol. The overproduced protein carries a similar methylation pattern at Lys-3 as does its homolog from Escherichia coli. Chymotrypsin digested only a small part of the TthL11 protein and did not cleave TthL11 into two peptides, as in the case of EcoL11, but produced only a single N-terminal peptide. Tryptic digestion of TthL11 also produced an N-terminal peptide, in contrast to the C-terminal peptide obtained with L11 from Bacillus stearothermophilus. The recombinant protein forms a specific complex with a 55-nt 23S rRNA fragment known to interact with members of the L11 family from several organisms. Cooperative binding of TthL11 and thiostrepton to 23S rRNA leads to an increased protection of TthL11 from tryptic digestion. The similar structural and biochemical properties as well as the significant homology between L11 from E. coli and B. stearothermophilus with the corresponding protein from Thermus thermophilus indicate an evolutionarily conserved protein important for ribosome function.
92	NR	10325228	The structure of a highly conserved complex between a 58-nucleotide domain of large subunit ribosomal RNA and the RNA-binding domain of ribosomal protein L11 has been solved at 2.8 angstrom resolution. It reveals a precisely folded RNA structure that is stabilized by extensive tertiary contacts and contains an unusually large core of stacked bases. A bulge loop base from one hairpin of the RNA is intercalated into the distorted major groove of another helix; the protein locks this tertiary interaction into place by binding to the intercalated base from the minor groove side. This direct interaction with a key ribosomal RNA tertiary interaction suggests that part of the role of L11 is to stabilize an unusual RNA fold within the ribosome.
92	NR	10090750	Comparative sequence analysis has successfully predicted secondary structure and tertiary interactions in ribosomal and other RNAs. Experiments presented here ask whether the scope of comparative sequence-based predictions can be extended to specific interactions between proteins and RNA, using as a system the well-characterized C-terminal RNA binding domain of ribosomal protein L11 (L11-C76) and its 58 nucleotide binding region in 23S rRNA. The surface of L11-C76 alpha-helix 3 is known to contact RNA; position 69 in this helix is conserved as serine in most organisms but varies to asparagine (all plastids) or glutamine (Mycoplasma). RNA sequence substitutions unique to these groups of organisms occur at base pairs 1062/1076 or 1058/1080, respectively. The possibility that rRNA base pair substitutions compensate for variants in L11 alpha-helix 3 has been tested by measuring binding affinities between sets of protein and RNA sequence variants. Stability of the RNA tertiary structure, as measured by UV melting experiments, was unexpectedly affected by a 1062/1076 base pair substitution; additional mutations were required to restore a stably folded structure to this RNA. The results show that the asparagine variant of L11-C76 residue 69 has been compensated by substitution of a 1062/1076 base pair, and plausibly suggest a direct contact between the amino acid and base pair. For some of the protein and RNA mutations studied, changes in binding affinity probably reflect longer-range adjustments of the protein-RNA contact surface.
92	NR	10074405	Micrococcin-resistant mutants of Bacillus megaterium that carry mutations affecting ribosomal protein L11 have been characterised. The mutants fall into two groups. "L11-minus" strains containing an L11 gene with deletions, insertions or nonsense mutations which grow 2.5-fold slower than the wild-type strain, whereas other mutants carrying single-site substitutions within an 11 amino acid residue segment of the N-terminal domain of L11 grow normally. Protein L11 binds to 23 S rRNA within the ribosomal GTPase centre which regulates GTP hydrolysis on ribosomal factors. Micrococcin binding within the rRNA component of this centre was probed on wild-type and mutant ribosomes, in vivo, using dimethyl sulphate where it generated an rRNA footprint indistinguishable from that produced in vitro, even after the cell growth had been arrested by treatment with either kirromycin or fusidic acid. No drug-rRNA binding was detected in vivo for the L11-minus mutants, while reduced binding (approximately 30-fold) was observed for two single-site mutants P23L and P26L. For the latter, the reduced drug affinity alone did not account for the resistance-phenotype because rapid cell growth occurred even at drug concentrations that would saturate the ribosomes. Micrococcin was also bound to complexes containing an rRNA fragment and wild-type or mutant L11, expressed as fusion proteins, and they were probed with proteinases. The drug produced strong protection effects on the wild-type protein and weak effects on the P23L and P26L mutant proteins. We infer that inhibition of cell growth by micrococcin, as for thiostrepton, results from the imposition of a conformational constraint on protein L11 which, in turn, perturbs the function(s) of the ribosomal factor-guanosine nucleotide complexes. Copyright 1999 Academic Press.
92	NR	9917010	NA
92	NR	9914420	We describe two modifications of the popular reporter green fluorescent protein (GFP) which have short half-lives in our system, the cellular slime mould Dictyostelium discoideum. One of these bears an N-terminal ubiquitin; this GFP was originally planned to be a substrate of the "N-end-rule" pathway, but deubiquitination does not seem to occur, and a degradation by the UFD (ubiquitin-fusion-degradation pathway seems more probable. The protein half-life is about 3-5 h. The second construct has an N-terminus derived from the L11 ribosomal protein; it is transported to the nucleus and broken down much more rapidly than the ubiquitin fusion (protein half-life about 30 min). We show examples of the use of these reporters in the study of gene expression in Dictyostelium.
92	NR	9862955	Structures of a number of ribosomal proteins have now been determined by crystallography and NMR, though the complete structure of a ribosomal protein-rRNA complex has yet to be solved. However, some ribosomal protein structures show strong similarity to well-known families of DNA or RNA binding proteins for which structures in complex with cognate nucleic acids are available. Comparison of the known nucleic acid binding mechanisms of these non-ribosomal proteins with the most highly conserved surfaces of similar ribosomal proteins suggests ways in which the ribosomal proteins may be binding RNA. Three binding motifs, found in four ribosomal proteins so far, are considered here: homeodomain-like alpha-helical proteins (L11), OB fold proteins (S1 and S17) and RNP consensus proteins (S6). These comparisons suggest that ribosomal proteins combine a small number of fundamental strategies to develop highly specific RNA recognition sites.
92	NR	9828420	NA
92	NR	9731302	The taxonomic relationships among nine strains of Streptomyces, which have been commonly used for genetic studies, were examined by sequence analysis of their ribosomal L11(= rplK) protein genes. Phylogenetic relationships among these organisms derived from similarity sequence analysis of the rplK genes were in good agreement with those derived from the analysis of the deduced L11 protein amino acid sequence itself, indicating complete sequence homology among Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2), 'Streptomyces lividans 66' and Streptomyces violaceoruber JCM 4423. S. coelicolor A3(2) related (in the order of closer relatedness) to Streptomyces antibioticus ATCC 14888, Streptomyces griseus IFO 13189, Streptomyces lavendulae MA 406 A-1 and Streptomyces virginiae MAFF 6014. Sequence analysis of the 26 N-terminal amino acid residues of ribosomal L30 proteins also resulted in similar phylogenetic relationships, except that S. griseus, S. lavendulae and S. virginiae were not differentiated from each other using this method. These findings concerning the phylogenetic relationship therefore confirm the previous conclusion that S. coelicolor A3(2), 'S. lividans 66' and S. violaceoruber should be recognized as a single taxon at the species level.
92	NR	9723724	NA
92	NR	9718323	Comparative sequence analysis reveals a coordinated set of nucleotide exchanges between the base pair 1092/1099 and the unpaired position 1072 [(1092/1099)1072] in the L11 binding domain of 23S ribosomal RNA. This set of exchanges has occurred at least 4 times during evolution, suggesting that these positions form a base triple. The analysis further suggests an important role for positions (1065/1073), adjacent to 1072. The covariation at positions (1092/1099)1072 is studied here by analysis of RNA variants using UV melting and binding of ribosomal protein L11 and thiostrepton to assay for tertiary folding of this domain. The tertiary structure of the RNA is eliminated by alteration of the unpaired nucleotide (C1072 to U mutation), and binding of L11 and thiostrepton are reduced 10-fold compared to the wild type. In contrast, substitution of the base pair (CG1092/1099 to UA mutation) allows formation of the tertiary structure but dramatically alters the pH dependence of tertiary folding. The fully compensated set of mutations, (CG)C to (UA)U, restores the tertiary structure of the RNA to a state almost identical to the wild type. The nature of this base triple and its implications for the folding of the RNA and ligand interactions are discussed.
92	NR	9707416	S4 is one of the first proteins to bind to 16S RNA during assembly of the prokaryotic ribosome. Residues 43-200 of S4 from Bacillus stearothermophilus (S4 Delta41) bind specifically to both 16S rRNA and to a pseudoknot within the alpha operon mRNA. As a first step toward understanding how S4 recognizes and organizes RNA, we have solved the structure of S4 Delta41 in solution by multidimensional heteronuclear nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. The fold consists of two globular subdomains, one comprised of four helices and the other comprised of a five-stranded antiparallel beta-sheet and three helices. Although cross-linking studies suggest that residues between helices alpha2 and alpha3 are close to RNA, the concentration of positive charge along the crevice between the two subdomains suggests that this could be an RNA-binding site. In contrast to the L11 RNA-binding domain studied previously, S4 Delta41 shows no fast local motions, suggesting that it has less capacity for refolding to fit RNA. The independently determined crystal structure of S4 Delta41 shows similar features, although there is small rotation of the subdomains compared with the solution structure. The relative orientation of the subdomains in solution will be verified with further study.
92	NR	9705149	There have been contrasting reports of whether the positioning of a translational stop signal immediately after a start codon in a single oligonucleotide can act as a model template to support efficient in vitro termination. This paradox stimulated this study of what determines the constraints on the positioning of the components in the termination complex. The mini mRNA, AUGUGAA, was unable to support efficient in vitro termination in contrast to separate AUG/UGA(A) codons, unless the ribosomal interaction of the stop signal with the decoding factor, release factor 2, was stimulated with ethanol or with nucleotide-free release factor 3, or by using (L11-)-ribosomes which have a higher affinity for release factor 2, or unless the fMet-tRNA was first bound to 30S subunits independently of the mini mRNA. An additional triplet stop codon could restore activity of the mini mRNA, indicating that its recognition was not sterically restrained by the stop signal already within it. This suggests that in an initiation complex an adjoining start/stop signal is not positioned to support efficient decoding by release factor unless it is separated from the start codon. Site-directed crosslinking from mRNAs to components of the termination complex has shown that mRNA elements like the Shine-Dalgarno sequence and the codon preceding the stop signal can affect the crosslinking to release factor, and presumably the orientation of the signal to the factor.
92	NR	9705145	Previously we demonstrated that ribosomes can synthesize polypeptides in the presence of high concentrations (40-60%) of pyridine without any protein factors. Here we analyze additional ribosomal parameters in 60% pyridine using Escherichia coli ribosomes. Ribosomal subunits once exposed to pyridine failed to re-associate to 70S ribosomes in aqueous buffer systems even in the presence of 20 mM Mg2+, whereas they formed 70S complexes in the presence of 60% pyridine. Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis of ribosomal proteins revealed that some proteins located at the protuberances of the large subunit, e. g. L7/L12 and L11 forming the elongation factor-binding domain, were released in the pyridine system. The aminoglycoside neomycin, a strong inhibitor of the ribosomal (factor-independent) translocation reaction, completely blocked poly(Phe) synthesis and translocation activities in the pyridine system, whereas these activities were not affected at all by gypsophilin, a ribotoxin that inhibits factor-dependent translocation. Another inhibitor of the ribosomal translocation, thiostrepton, had no effect concerning the two activities, which is consistent with the fact that this antibiotic requires L11 for its binding to the ribosome. These results suggest that the ribosomes can perform a translocation reaction in the pyridine system, but in a factor-independent (spontaneous) manner.
92	NR	9666324	Over the past two years, progress in X-ray crystallography, NMR spectroscopy and electron microscopy has begun to reveal the complex structure of the RNA within the ribosome. The structures of ribosomal proteins L11 and S15, among others, show how RNA-protein interactions organize the conformation of the junctions between ribosomal RNA helices. Genetic and biochemical methods have also identified a three base-pair switch within the 16S rRNA that is linked to mRNA decoding.
92	NR	9560439	We sequenced a region of about 14.5 kb downstream from the ribosomal protein L11 gene (rpl11) in the mitochondrial DNA (54+/-2 kb) of the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum. Sequence analysis revealed that eleven ribosomal protein genes and six open reading frames (ORFs) formed a cluster arranged in the order: rpl11-orf189-rps12-rps7-rpl2-rps19-+ ++orf425-orf1740-rpl16-rpl14-orf188- rps14-rps8-rpl6-rps13-orf127-orf796. This order was very similar to that of homologous genes in Acanthamoeba castellanii mitochondrial DNA. The N-terminal region of ORF425 and the C-terminal region of ORF1740 had partial similarities to the S3 ribosomal protein of other organisms. The termination codons of rpl16 and orf188 were UGA, which has not hitherto been found in genes encoded in D. discoideum mitochondrial DNA.
92	NR	9512711	A newly identified class of highly thiostrepton-resistant mutants of the archaeon Halobacterium halobium carry a missense mutation at codon 18 within the gene encoding ribosomal protein L11. In the mutant proteins, a proline, conserved in archaea and bacteria, is converted to either serine or threonine. The mutations do not impair either the assembly of the mutant L11 into 70 S ribosomes in vivo or the binding of thiostrepton to ribosomes in vitro. Moreover, the corresponding mutations at proline 22, in a fusion protein of L11 from Escherichia coli with glutathione-S-transferase, did not reduce the binding affinities of the mutated L11 fusion proteins for rRNA of of thiostrepton for the mutant L11-rRNA complexes at rRNA concentrations lower than those prevailing in vivo. Probing the structure of the fusion protein of wild-type L11, from E. coli, using a recently developed protein footprinting technique, demonstrated that a general tightening of the C-terminal domain occurred on rRNA binding, while thiostrepton produced a footprint centred on tyrosine 62 at the junction of the N and C-terminal domains of protein L11 complexed to rRNA. The intensity of this protein footprint was strongly reduced for the mutant L11-rRNA complexes. These results indicate that although, as shown earlier, thiostrepton binds primarily to 23 S rRNA, the drug probably inhibits peptide elongation by impeding a conformational change within protein L11 that is important for the function of the ribosomal GTPase centre. This putative inhibitory mechanism of thiostrepton is critically dependent on proline 18/22. Moreover, the absence of this proline from eukaryotic protein L11 sequences would account for the high thiostrepton resistance of eukaryotic ribosomes.
92	NR	9491081	A 5018-bp DNA fragment of the rpl/rpo BC gene cluster (here called the rif cluster) of Streptomyces griseus N2-3-11 was analysed by DNA sequencing and transcription studies. By sequence comparison of the deduced proteins, five genes and part of an open reading frame (orf) were identified. The genes encoding the ribosomal (r-) proteins L1 (rplA), L7/12 (rplJ), L10 (rplK) and L11 (rplL), a protein of known function (orf31), and the N-terminus of the beta subunit of RNA polymerase (rpoB), are organized in three operons, rplKA, rplJL and rpoB(C), and the monocistronic transcription unit orf31. The promoters of these transcription units, rplKp, orf31p, rplJp, and rpoBp, were identified and the growth-phase dependence of the transcription of these operons was analysed. Binding sites for the ribosomal proteins L1 and L10 were identified by sequence comparison, suggesting that the r-proteins RplA and RplJ are involved in feedback regulation of their respective operons by binding to specific RNA-binding sites present in both the mRNA and the 23S rRNA, as has been described for other bacteria. The analyses of the rpoBp promoter by means of promoter-probe plasmids suggested a possible attenuator-based regulatory mechanism for the transcription of the rpoB(C) operon.
92	NR	9484899	The control of ribosomal protein synthesis has been investigated extensively in Eukarya and Bacteria. In Archaea, only the regulation of the MvaL1 operon (encoding ribosomal proteins MvaL1, MvaL10 and MvaL12) of Methanococcus vannielii has been studied in some detail. As in Escherichia coil, regulation takes place at the level of translation. MvaL1, the homologue of the regulatory protein L1 encoded by the L11 operon of E. coli, was shown to be an autoregulator of the MvaL1 operon. The regulatory MvaL1 binding site on the mRNA is located about 30 nucleotides downstream of the ATG start codon, a sequence that is not in direct contact with the initiating ribosome. Here, we demonstrate that autoregulation of MvaL1 occurs at or before the formation of the first peptide bond of MvaL1. Specific interaction of purified MvaL1 with both 23S RNA and its own mRNA is confirmed by filter binding studies. In vivo expression experiments reveal that translation of the distal MvaL10 and MvaL12 cistrons is coupled to that of the MvaL1 cistron. A mRNA secondary structure resembling a canonical L10 binding site and preliminary in vitro regulation experiments had suggested a co-regulatory function of MvaL10, the homologue of the regulatory protein L10 of the beta-operon of E. coil. However, we show that MvaL10 does not have a regulatory function.
92	NR	9430711	Five different variants of protein L7/L12, each with a single cysteine substitution at a selected site, were produced, modified with 125I-N-[4-(p-azidosalicylamido)-butyl]-3-(2'-pyridyldithio)propion amide, a radiolabeled, sulfhydryl-specific, heterobifunctional, cleavable photocross-linking reagent that transfers radiolabel to the target molecule upon reduction of the disulfide bond. The proteins were reconstituted with core particles depleted of wild type L7/L12 to yield 70 S ribosomes. Cross-linked molecules were identified and quantified by the radiolabel. No cross-linking of RNA was detected. Two sites in the dimeric N-terminal domain, Cys-12 and Cys-33, cross-linked strongly to L10 and in lower yield to L11 but to no other proteins. The three sites in the globular C-terminal domain all cross-linked strongly to L11 and, in lower yield, to L10. Weaker cross-linking to 50 S proteins L2 and L5 occurred from all three C-terminal domain locations. The 30 S ribosomal proteins S2, S3, S7, S14, S18 were also cross-linked from all three of these sites. Binding of the ternary complex [14C]Phe-tRNA-elongation factor Tu.guanyl-5'-yl imidodiphosphate) but not [14C]Phe-tRNA.elongation factor Tu.GDP.kirromycin increased labeling of L2, L5, and all of the 30 S proteins. These results imply the flexibility of L7/L12 and the transient proximity of three surfaces of the C-terminal domain with the base of the stalk, the peptidyl transferase domain, and the head of the 30 S subunit.
92	NR	9398519	The three-dimensional solution structure has been determined by NMR spectroscopy of the 75 residue C-terminal domain of ribosomal protein L11 (L11-C76) in its RNA-bound state. L11-C76 recognizes and binds tightly to a highly conserved 58 nucleotide domain of 23 S ribosomal RNA, whose secondary structure consists of three helical stems and a central junction loop. The NMR data reveal that the conserved structural core of the protein, which consists of a bundle of three alpha-helices and a two-stranded parallel beta-sheet four residues in length, is nearly the same as the solution structure determined for the non-liganded form of the protein. There are however, substantial chemical shift perturbations which accompany RNA binding, the largest of which map onto an extended loop which bridges the C-terminal end of alpha-helix 1 and the first strand of parallel beta-sheet. Substantial shift perturbations are also observed in the N-terminal end of alpha-helix 1, the intervening loop that bridges helices 2 and 3, and alpha-helix 3. The four contact regions identified by the shift perturbation data also displayed protein-RNA NOEs, as identified by isotope-filtered three-dimensional NOE spectroscopy. The shift perturbation and NOE data not only implicate helix 3 as playing an important role in RNA binding, but also indicate that regions flanking helix 3 are involved as well. Loop 1 is of particular interest as it was found to be flexible and disordered for L11-C76 free in solution, but not in the RNA-bound form of the protein, where it appears rigid and adopts a specific conformation as a result of its direct contact to RNA. Copyright 1997 Academic Press Limited.
92	NR	9367788	A 58 nucleotide fragment of Escherichia coli large subunit ribosomal RNA, nucleotides 1051 to 1108, adopts a specific tertiary structure normally requiring both monovalent (NH4+ or K+) and divalent (Mg2+) ions to fold; this ion-dependent structure is a prerequisite for recognition by ribosomal protein L11. Melting experiments have been used to show that a sequence variant of this fragment, GACG RNA, is able to adopt a stable tertiary structure in the presence of 1.6 M NH4Cl and absence of divalent ions. The similarity of this high-salt structure to the tertiary structure formed under more typical salt conditions (0.1 M NH4Cl and several mM MgCl2) was shown by its following properties: (i) an unusual ratio of hyperchromicity at 260 nm and 280 nm upon unfolding, (ii) selectivity for NH4+ over K+ or Na+, (iii) stabilization by L11 protein, and (iv) further stabilization by added Mg2+. Delocalized electrostatic interactions of divalent ions with nucleic acids should be very weak in the presence of >1 M monovalent salt; thus stabilization of the tertiary structure by low (<1 mM) Mg2+ concentrations in these high-salt conditions suggests that Mg2+ binds at specific site(s). GACG RNA tertiary structure unfolding in 1.6 M NH4Cl (Tm approximately 39 degrees C) is distinct from melting of the secondary structure (centered at approximately 72 degrees C), and it has been possible to calculate the free energy of tertiary structure stabilization upon addition of various divalent cations. From these binding free energies, ion-RNA binding isotherms for Mn2+, Mg2+, Ca2+, Sr2+ and Ba2+ have been obtained. All of these ions bind at two sites: one site favors Mg2+ and Ba2+ and discriminates against Ca2+, while the other site favors binding of smaller ions over larger ones (Mg2+ >Ca2+ >Sr2+ >Ba2+). Weak cooperative or anticooperative interactions between the sites, also dependent on ion radius, may also be taking place. Copyright 1997 Academic Press Limited.
92	NR	9413432	A RelC deletion mutant, KO-100, of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) has been isolated from a collection of spontaneous thiostrepton-resistant mutants. KO-100 grows as vigorously as the parent strain and possesses a 6-bp deletion within the rplK, previously termed relC. When the wild-type rplK gene was propagated on a low-copy-number vector in mutant KO-100, the ability to produce ppGpp, actinorhodin and undecylprodigiosin, which had been lost in the RelC mutant, was completely restored. Allele replacement by gene homogenotization demonstrated that the RelC mutation is responsible for the resistance to thiostrepton and the inactivation of ppGpp, actinorhodin and undecylprodigiosin production. Western blotting showed that ribosomes from the RelC mutant KO-100 contain only one-eighth the amount of L11 protein found in ribosomes of the parent strain. The impairment of antibiotic production in KO-100 could be rescued by the introduction of mutations that confer resistance to streptomycin (str), which result in alteration of Lys-88 in ribosomal protein S12 to Glu or Arg. No accompanying restoration of ppGpp synthesis was detected in these RelC str double mutants.
92	NR	9371771	The hot tritium bombardment technique [Goldanskii, V. I., Kashirin, I. A., Shishkov, A. V., Baratova, L. A. & Grebenshchikov, N. I. (1988) J. Mol. Biol. 201,567-574] has been applied to measure the exposure of proteins on the ribosomal surface. The technique is based on replacement of hydrogen by high energy tritium atoms in thin surface layer of macromolecules. Quantitation of tritium radioactivity of each protein has revealed that proteins S1, S4, S5, S7, S18, S20, and S21 of the small subunit, and proteins L7/L12, L9, L10, L11, L16, L17, L24, and L27 of the large subunit are well exposed on the surface of the Escherichia coli 70 S ribosome. Proteins S8, S10, S12, S16, S17, L14, L20, L29, L30, L31, L32, L33, and L34 have virtually no groups exposed on the ribosomal surface. The remaining proteins are found to be exposed to lesser degree than the well exposed ones. No additional ribosomal proteins was exposed upon dissociation of ribosomes into subunits, thus indicating the absence of proteins on intersubunit contacting surfaces.
92	NR	9323358	The rplK (= relC) gene, which codes for ribosomal protein L11, was cloned from Streptomyces griseus IFO13189 using a screening procedure based on polymerase chain reaction amplification of a gene segment that subsequently allowed the isolation of the complete gene from a gene library. rplK lies between the nusG gene, encoding a protein involved in antitermination of transcription, and the rplA gene, which encodes the ribosomal protein L1. Comparison of the rplK gene sequences of the wild-type strain and the presumed relC mutant strain 3-3 (originally isolated as a thiopeptin-resistant isolate) revealed a 12-bp deletion within the rplK gene from the mutant, flanked by a 4-bp repeat sequence in the corresponding region in the wild type. When the wild-type rplK gene was propagated on a low-copy-number vector in the relC mutant 3-3, the ability to produce guanosine 5'-diphosphate 3'-diphosphate, streptomycin, and submerged spores was completely restored to parental levels. The impaired ability to form aerial mycelium was, however, unaffected. Western blotting analysis showed that the ribosomes from the relC mutant 3-3 incorporate the mutant L11 protein normally, although the level of incorporation is approximately one-third that of the wild-type L11 protein in ribosomes of the parent strain. Propagation of the mutant rplK gene in the wild-type strain resulted in marked defects in growth, streptomycin production, and aerial mycelium formation, indicating that the mutant L11 protein exerts certain negative effects in the cells.
92	NR	9244252	We identified a novel stress-responsive operon (sro) of Helicobacter pylori that contains seven genes which are likely to be involved in cellular functions as diverse as chemotaxis, heat shock response, ion transport, and posttranslational protein modification. The products of three of these genes show amino acid homologies to known proteins, such as the flagellar motor switch protein CheY, a class of heat shock proteins, and the ribosomal protein L11 methyltransferase, and to a phosphatidyltransferase. In addition to containing an open reading frame of unknown function, the product of which is predicted to be membrane associated, the sro locus contains three open reading frames that have previously been described as constituting two separate loci, the ftsH gene and the copAP operon of H. pylori. Knockout mutants showed that CheY is essential for bacterial motility and that CopA, but not CopP, relieves copper toxicity. Transcriptional analyses indicated that this locus is regulated by a single promoter and that a positive effect on transcription is exerted by the addition of copper to the medium and by temperature upshift from 37 to 45 degrees C. The possible role of this locus in H. pylori virulence is discussed.
92	NR	9252104	The complete nucleotide sequence of a gene cluster encoding the NusG and the L 11-L1-L10-L12 ribosomal proteins from the thermophilic crenarchaeon Sulfolobus solfataricus has been determined. The genes are arranged in the same order as the equivalent genes in the rif region of Escherichia coli. The ribosomal proteins exhibit between 66% (L10) and 80% (L12) identity with their respective equivalents from Sulfolobus acidocaldarius. The short distance (5 nucleotides) between the nusG stop codon and the L11 start codon suggests that nusG and the genes for the ribosomal proteins are transcribed as a single unit.
92	NR	9240471	A maize cDNA encoding the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5 (eIF-5) has been isolated from an 8-day-old seedling cDNA library. The 1975 bp cDNA encodes a protein of 451 amino acids, with a predicted molecular weight of 49.04 kDa, and hybridizes to a single sequence in the maize genome. The deduced sequence contains motifs characteristic of proteins belonging to the GPTase superfamily, a zinc finger well conserved in all the protein sequences for eIF-5 reported so far, and a fragment also present in prokaryotic and chloroplast L11 ribosomal protein. Polymer-binding assays have been used to assess the predicted RNA binding property of the protein and to characterize its function. It is shown that the eIF-5-encoded protein binds to single-stranded DNA and to polyuridylic acid and that the binding is dependent on the presence of Zn2+ ions. These results suggest that the zinc-finger structure is involved in the binding of the eIF-5 protein to RNA.
92	NR	9162110	The Saccharomyces cerevisiae open reading frame YDL202w has been characterised in the course of the EUROFAN yeast genome analysis program. Disruption of YDL202w causes a respiratory deficient phenotype accompanied by a loss of mitochondrial DNA. This phenotype is usually found in mutants defective in mitochondrial replication or gene expression. YDL202w has the potential to encode a soluble protein of 249 amino acids. It shows significant similarities to the ribosomal protein L10 from various bacteria and to a previously determined amino-terminal peptide sequence of the yeast mitochondrial ribosomal protein L11. The predicted amino-acid sequence of YDL202w starts with a stretch which has neither any correspondence in the bacterial sequences nor in the protein isolated from mitochondrial ribosomes. Furthermore, this stretch matches the requirements for a signal sequence for mitochondrial protein import. A mitochondrial location of the YDL202w gene product was proven by use of a carboxy terminally HA-tagged version. These findings clearly indicate that YDL202w encodes this mitochondrial ribosomal protein (YmL11).
92	NR	9106366	Halophilic (literally salt-loving) archaea are a highly evolved group of organisms that are uniquely able to survive in and exploit hypersaline environments. In this review, we examine the potential interplay between fluctuations in environmental salinity and the primary sequence and tertiary structure of halophilic proteins. The proteins of halophilic archaea are highly adapted and magnificently engineered to function in an intracellular milieu that is in ionic balance with an external environment containing between 2 and 5 M inorganic salt. To understand the nature of halophilic adaptation and to visualize this interplay, the sequences of genes encoding the L11, L1, L10, and L12 proteins of the large ribosome subunit and Mn/Fe superoxide dismutase proteins from three genera of halophilic archaea have been aligned and analyzed for the presence of synonymous and nonsynonymous nucleotide substitutions. Compared to homologous eubacterial genes, these halophilic genes exhibit an inordinately high proportion of nonsynonymous nucleotide substitutions that result in amino acid replacement in the encoded proteins. More than one-third of the replacements involve acidic amino acid residues. We suggest that fluctuations in environmental salinity provide the driving force for fixation of the excessive number of nonsynonymous substitutions. Tinkering with the number, location, and arrangement of acidic and other amino acid residues influences the fitness (i.e., hydrophobicity, surface hydration, and structural stability) of the halophilic protein. Tinkering is also evident at halophilic protein positions monomorphic or polymorphic for serine; more than one-third of these positions use both the TCN and the AGY serine codons, indicating that there have been multiple nonsynonymous substitutions at these positions. Our model suggests that fluctuating environmental salinity prevents optimization of fitness for many halophilic proteins and helps to explain the unusual evolutionary divergence of their encoding genes.
92	NR	9195040	The translation factor EF-P is required for efficient prokaryotic peptide bond synthesis on 70S ribosomes from fMet-tRNAfMet. This protein has been purified from Escherichia coli cells and the gene, efp, encoding it has been cloned and sequenced. We have isolated recombinant clones which overexpress a protein that co-migrates with purified EF-P upon SDS-PAGE analysis. Using these clones, we report the purification, crystallization and initial characterization of the efp gene product. The mechanism by which EF-P stimulates peptide-bond synthesis was studied using several antibiotics that inhibit translocation, peptide-bond synthesis and decoding. The stimulation of peptidyltransferase by EF-P was not inhibited by antibiotics that affect translocation and occupation of the A site (in the elongation state), ie thiostrepton, viomycin, neomycin and fusidic acid but was inhibited by streptomycin as well as by inhibitors of peptidyltransferase, chloramphenicol and lincomycin. This observation and the requirement for L16 but not for the L7/L12 nor L6 or L11 r-proteins suggest that the binding site for EF-P may overlap the peptidyltransferase center of the ribosome.
92	NR	8989327	The structure of the C-terminal RNA recognition domain of ribosomal protein L11 has been solved by heteronuclear three-dimensional nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Although the structure can be considered high resolution in the core, 15 residues between helix alpha 1 and strand beta 1 form an extended, unstructured loop. 15N transverse relaxation measurements suggest that the loop is moving on a picosecond-to-nanosecond time scale in the free protein but not in the protein bound to RNA. Chemical shifts differences between the free protein and the bound protein suggest that the loop as well as the C-terminal end of helix alpha 3 are involved in RNA binding.
92	NR	8989317	NA
92	NR	8758993	A conserved hairpin corresponding to nt 1057-1081 of large subunit rRNA (Escherichia coli numbering) is part of a domain targeted by antibiotics and ribosomal protein L11. The stem of the hairpin contains a U.U juxtaposition, found as either U.U or U.C in virtually all rRNA sequences. This hairpin has been synthesized and most of the aromatic and sugar protons were assigned by two-dimensional proton NMR. Distances and sugar puckers deduced from the NMR data were combined with restrained molecular dynamics calculations to deduce structural features of the hairpin. The two U residues are stacked in the helix, form one NH3-O4 hydrogen bond and require an extended backbone conformation (trans alpha and gamma) at one of the U nucleotides. The hairpin loop, UAGAAGC closed by a U-A pair, is the same size as tRNA anticodon loops, but not as well ordered.
92	NR	8675039	A 6.5-kb DNA fragment containing the gene (rpoB) encoding the RNA polymerase (RNAP) beta subunit, from the mollicute Spiroplasma citri (Sc), was cloned and sequenced. The classical eubacterial organization, with the genes (rplK, A, J and L) encoding ribosomal proteins L11, L1, L10 and L12 located immediately upstream from rpoB, was not found in the Sc DNA. Instead, an open reading frame (hsdS) potentially encoding a component of a type I restriction and modification system was identified upstream from rpoB, and sequences showing similarities with insertion elements were found between hsdS and rpoB.
92	NR	8675024	The gene organization of a 7.4-kb region of the Streptomyces virginiae (Sv) chromosome was determined. The predicted open reading frames (ORFs) and their predicted products, in sequence order, were (i) ada, encoding adenosine deaminase [EC 3.5.4.4], (ii) aat, encoding a protein homologous to aspartate aminotransferase [EC 2.6.1.1], (iii) secE, encoding a protein involved in protein secretion, (iv) vbrA, encoding a NusG-like protein involved in antitermination of transcription as described by Okamoto et al. [J. Biol. Chem. 267 (1992) 1093-1098], and (v) rplKAJL, encoding the large subunits of the ribosomal proteins L11, L1, L10 and L12. Six of the ORFs (secE-rplL) were oriented in the same direction, but the other two (ada and aat) had the opposite orientation. The gene organization of the secE-rplL region in Sv was identical to that in Escherichia coli.
92	NR	8634289	Ribosomal protein L11 interacts with a 58-nucleotide domain of large subunit ribosomal RNA; both the protein and its RNA target have been highly conserved. The antibiotic thiostrepton recognizes the same RNA domain, and binds to the ribosome cooperatively with L11. Experiments presented here show that RNA recognition and thiostrepton cooperativity can be attributed to C- and N-terminal domains of L11, respectively. Under trypsin digestion conditions that degrade Bacillus stearothermophilus L11 to small fragments, the target RNA protects the C-terminal 77 residues from digestion, and thiostrepton and RNA in combination protect the entire protein. A 76-residue C-terminal fragment of L11 was overexpressed and shown to fold into a stable structure binding ribosomal RNA with essentially the same properties as full-length L11. An L11.thiostrepton.RNA complex was 100-200-fold more stable than expected on the basis of L11-RNA and thiostrepton-RNA binding affinities; similar measurements with the C-terminal fragment detected no cooperativity with thiostrepton. L11 function is thus more complex than simple interaction with ribosomal RNA; we suggest that thiostrepton mimics some ribosomal component or factor that normally interacts with the L11 N-terminal domain.
92	NR	8618891	A role for rRNA in peptide chain termination was indicated several years ago by isolation of a 168 rRNA (small subunit) mutant of Escherichia coli that suppressed UGA mutations. In this paper, we describe another interesting rRNA mutant, selected as a translational suppressor of the chain-terminating mutant trpA (UGA211) of E. coli. The finding that it suppresses UGA at two positions in trpA and does not suppress the other two termination codons, UAA and UAG, at the same codon positions (or several missense mutations, including UGG, available at one of the two positions) suggests a defect in UGA-specific termination. The suppressor mutation was mapped by plasmid fragment exchanges and in vivo suppression to domain II of the 23S rRNA gene of the rrnB operon. Sequence analysis revealed a single base change of G to A at residue 1093, an almost universally conserved base in a highly conserved region known to have specific interactions with ribosomal proteins, elongation factor G, tRNA in the A-site, and the peptidyltransferase region of 23S rRNA. Several avenues of action of the suppressor mutation are suggested, including altered interactions with release factors, ribosomal protein L11, or 16S rRNA. Regardless of the mechanism, the results indicate that a particular residue in 23S rRNA affects peptide chain termination, specifically in decoding of the UGA termination codon.
92	NR	8530386	A molecular basis for the insensitivity of eukaryotic ribosomes to the antibiotic thiostrepton was investigated using synthetic 100-nucleotide-long fragments covering the GTPase domain of 23/28 S rRNA. Filter binding assay showed no detectable binding of the rat RNA to thiostrepton, but the binding capacity was markedly increased by base substitution of G1878 to A at the position corresponding to 1067 of Escherichia coli 23 S rRNA. The association constant (K alpha) for the rat A 1878 mutant was 0.60 x 10(6) M-1, which was comparable with that of the E. coli RNA (K alpha = 1.1 x 10(6) M-1). This suggests that the eukaryotic G 1878 participates in the resistance for thiostrepton. On the other hand, the RNA fragments of the two species had a similar binding capacity for E. coli ribosomal protein L11 and its mammalian homologue L12. Gel electrophoresis under a high ionic condition, however, revealed a difference between the two proteins. E. coli L11 formed stable complexes with both the E. coli RNA and the rat A 1878 mutant RNA in the presence of thiostrepton, while rat L12 failed to exhibit such complex formation. This suggests that the eukaryotic L12 protein may also be an element giving the resistance for thiostrepton. These results are discussed in terms of preserved three-dimensional conformation of the RNA backbone between prokaryotes and higher eukaryotes.
92	NR	8722035	Ribosomal RNAs fold into phylogenetically conserved secondary and tertiary structures that determine their function in protein synthesis. We have investigated Escherichia coli 23S rRNA to identify structural elements that interact with antibiotic and protein ligands. Using a combination of molecular genetic and biochemical probing techniques, we have concentrated on regions of the rRNA that are connected with specific functions. These are located in different domains within the 23S rRNA and include the ribosomal GTPase-associated center in domain II, which contains the binding sites for r-proteins L10.(L12)4 and L11 and is inhibited by interaction with the antibiotic thiostrepton. The peptidyltransferase center within domain V is inhibited by macrolide, lincosamide, and streptogramin B antibiotics, which interact with the rRNA around nucleotide A2058. Drug resistance is conferred by mutations here and by modification of A2058 by ErmE methyltransferase. ErmE recognizes a conserved motif displayed in the primary and secondary structure of the peptidyl transferase loop. Within domain VI of rRNA, the alpha-sarcin stem-loop is associated with elongation factor binding and is the target site for ribotoxins including the N-glycosidase ribosome-inactivating proteins ricin and pokeweed antiviral protein (PAP). The orientations of the 23S rRNA domains are constrained by tetiary interactions, including a pseudoknot in domain II and long-range base pairings in the center of the molecule that bring domains II and V closer together. The phenotypic effects of mutations in these regions have been investigated by expressing 23S rRNA from plasmids. Allele-specific priming sites have been introduced close to these structures in the rRNA to enable us to study the molecular events there.
92	NR	8722011	The eukaryoic ribosomal stalk is thought to consist of the phosphoproteins P1 and P2, which form a complex with protein PO. This complex interacts at the GTPase domain in the large subunit rRNA, overlapping the binding site of the protein L11-like eukaryotic counterpart (Saccharomyces cerevisiae protein L15 and mammalian protein L12). An unusual pool of the dephosphorylated forms of proteins P1 and P2 is detected in eukaryotic cytoplasm, and an exchange between the proteins in the pool and on the ribosome takes place during translation. Quadruply disrupted yeast strains, carrying four inactive acidic protein genes and, therefore, containing ribosomes totally depleted of acidic proteins, are viable but grow with a doubling time threefold higher than wild-type cells. The in vitro translation systems derived from these stains are active but the two-dimensional gel electrophoresis pattern of proteins expressed in vivo and in vitro is partially different. These results indicate that the P1 and P2 proteins are not essential for ribosome activity but are able to affect the translation of some specific mRNAs. Protein PO is analogous to bacterial ribosomal protein L10 but carries an additional carboxyl domain showing a high sequence homology to the acidic proteins P1 and P2, including the terminal peptide DDDMGFGLFD. Successive deletions of the PO carboxyl domain show that removal of the last 21 amino acids from the PO carboxyl domain only slightly affects the ribosome activity in a wild-type genetic background; however, the same deletion is lethal in a quadruple disruptant deprived of acidic P1/P2 proteins. Additional deletions affect the interaction of PO with the P1 and P2 proteins and with the rRNA. The experimental data available support the implication of the eukaryotic stalk components in some regulatory process that modulates the ribosomal activity.
92	NR	8722008	To screen for ribosomal RNA mutants defective in peptide chain termination, we have been looking for rRNA mutants that exhibit different patterns of suppression of nonsense mutations and that do not suppress missense mutations at the same positions in the same reporter gene. The rRNA mutations were induced by segment-directed randomly mutagenic PCR treatment of a cloned rrnB operon, followed by subcloning of the mutagenesis products and transformation of strains containing different nonsense mutations in the Escherichia coli trpA gene. To date, we have repeatedly obtained only two small sets of mutations, one in the 3' domain of 16S rRNA, at five nucleotides out of the 610 mutagenized (two in helix 34 and three in helix 44), and the other in 23S rRNA at only four neighboring nucleotide positions (in a highly conserved hexanucleotide loop) within the 1.4 kb mutagenized segment. There is variety, however, in the suppression patterns of the mutants, ranging from suppression of UAG or UGA, through suppression of UAG and UGA, but not UAA, to suppression of all three termination codons. The two helices in 16S rRNA have previously been associated both physically and functionally with the decoding center of the ribosome. The 23S region is part of the binding site for the large subunit protein L11 and the antibiotic thiostrepton, both of which have been shown to affect peptide chain termination. Finally, we have demonstrated that the 23S mutant A1093, which suppresses trpA UGA mutations very efficiently, is lethal at temperatures above 36 degrees C (when highly expressed). This lethality is overcome by secondary 23S rRNA mutations in domain V. Our results suggest that specific regions of 16S and 23S rRNA are involved in peptide chain termination, that the lethality of A1093 is caused by high-level UGA suppression, and that intramolecular interaction between domains II and V of 23S rRNA may play a role in peptide chain termination at the UGA stop codon.
92	NR	7567452	Ribosomal protein L11 and an antibiotic, thiostrepton, bind to the same highly conserved region of large subunit ribosomal RNA and stabilize a set of NH4(+)-dependent tertiary interactions within the domain. In vitro selection from partially randomized pools of RNA sequences has been used to ask what aspects of RNA structure are recognized by the ligands. L11-selected RNAs showed little sequence variation over the entire 70 nucleotide randomized region, while thiostrepton required a slightly smaller 58 nucleotide domain. All the selected mutations preserved or stabilized the known secondary and tertiary structure of the RNA. L11-selected RNAs from a pool mutagenized only around a junction structure yielded a very different consensus sequence, in which the RNA tertiary structure was substantially destabilized and L11 binding was no longer dependent on NH4+. We propose that L11 can bind the RNA in two different 'modes', depending on the presence or absence of the NH4(+)-dependent tertiary structure, while thiostrepton can only recognize the RNA tertiary structure. The different RNA recognition mechanisms for the two ligands may be relevant to their different effects on protein synthesis.
92	NR	7630717	The ribosomal protein L11 binds to the region of 23S rRNA associated with the GTPase-dependent steps of protein synthesis. Nucleotides 1054-1107 within this region of the Escherichia coli 23S rRNA gene were mutagenized with bisulphite. Twenty point mutations (G-->A and C-->T transitions) and numerous multiple mutations were generated. Expression of mutant 23S rRNAs in vivo shows that all the mutations detectably alter the phenotype, with effects ranging from a slight growth rate reduction to lack of viability. Temperature sensitivity is conferred by 1071G-->A and 1092C-->U substitutions. These effects are relieved by point mutations at other sites, indicating functional interconnections within the higher order structure of this 23S rRNA region. Several mutations prevent direct binding of r-protein L11 to 23S rRNA in vitro. These mutations are mainly in a short irregular stem (1087-1102) and within a hairpin loop (1068-1072), where the protein probably makes nucleotide contacts. Some of these mutations also interfere with binding of the r-protein complex L10.(L12)4 to an adjacent site on the rRNA. When added together to rRNA, proteins L10.(L12)4 and L11 bind cooperatively to overcome the effects of mutations at 1091 and 1099. The proteins also stimulate each others binding to rRNA mutated at 1087 or 1092, although in these cases binding remains clearly substoichiometric. Surprisingly, none of the mutations prevents incorporation of L11 into ribosomes in vivo, indicating that other, as yet unidentified, factors are involved in the cooperative assembly process.
92	NR	8581739	During the course of analysis of the mitochondrial genome of the cellular slime mold, Dictyostelium discoideum, we found a gene (rpl11) for mitochondrial ribosomal protein (RPL11), having 172 amino acid residues. Southern blot analysis revealed that the gene resided in the mitochondrial DNA as a single-copy but not in the nuclear DNA. From Northern blot experiments, one major mRNA (about 27 kb) and two minor mRNAs (about 4 and 5 kb) for the gene were detected in the mitochondria. This is the first report showing that the active gene for RPL11 still resides in the mitochondrial genome and has not been transferred to the nuclear genome in D. discoideum.
92	NR	7783196	Interactions between ribosomal protein L11 and a domain of large subunit rRNA have been highly conserved and are essential for efficient protein synthesis. To study the effects of L11 on rRNA folding, a homolog of the Escherichia coli L11 gene has been amplified from Bacillus stearothermophilus DNA and cloned into a phage T7 polymerase-based expression system. The expressed protein is 93% homologous to the L11 homolog from Bacillus subtilis, denatures at temperatures above 72 degrees C, and has nearly identical rRNA binding properties as the Escherichia coli L11 in terms of RNA affinity constants and their dependences on temperature, Mg2+ concentration, monovalent cation, and RNA mutations. Mg2+ and NH4+ are specifically bound by the RNA-protein complex, with apparent ion-RNA affinities of 1.6 mM-1 and 19 M-1, respectively, at 0 degree C. The effect of the thermostable L11 on the unfolding of a 60 nucleotide rRNA fragment containing its binding domain has been examined in melting experiments. The lowest temperature RNA transition, which is attributed to tertiary structure unfolding, is stabilized by approximately 25 degrees C, and the interaction has an intrinsic enthalpy of approximately 13 kcal/mol. The thermal stability of the protein-RNA complex is enhanced by increasing Mg2+ concentration and by NH4+ relative to Na+. Thus L11, NH4+, and Mg2+ all bind and stabilize the same rRNA tertiary interactions, which are conserved and presumably important for ribosome function.
92	NR	7477109	NA
92	NR	7715599	A 3 kb genomic fragment containing the nusG gene of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) was identified, cloned and sequenced. Sequence analysis revealed 3 complete and 2 truncated open reading frames (ORFs): truncated ORFU (similar to a Bacillus gene encoding a thermostable aspartate aminotransferase)-secE (94 amino acids; 79.0% similarity to Escherichia coli SecE)-nusG (300 amino acids; 73.3% similarity to E. coli NusG)-rplK (144 amino acids; 88.5% similarity to E. coli ribosomal subunit L11)-truncated rplA (similar to E. coli ribosomal subunit L1). The gene organization secE-nusG-rplKA exactly matches that in E. coli. Transcriptional analyses by the primer extension method revealed one transcriptional start site each for secE and nusG, and two sites for rplK. The presence of promoters was also confirmed with the aid of a promoter-probe vector.
92	NR	7893752	We report the isolation of the Drosophila melanogaster homologue of the rat ribosomal protein L11 gene. The gene is present in the Drosophila genome at polytene chromosome location 56D, on the right arm of the second chromosome. The Drosophila DL11 gene appears to encode two messages of 0.8 and 0.9 kb which are expressed throughout development with variations in their relative abundance. DL11 codes for a predicted protein of 184 amino acids with a molecular mass of 21.1 kDa.
92	NR	7748210	A polymerase chain reaction strategy was employed to isolate cDNA encoding L11 human ribosomal protein. Based on the known nucleotide sequence of 5'-region of the ribosomal protein L11 mRNA, we have designed primers and used them in amplification of corresponding sequence of human cDNA from total placenta cDNA. The fragment of RPS26 cDNA was cloned in plasmid vector and sequenced. Sequence analysis showed that there is high homology (88%) between coding regions of RPS26 mRNAs in rat liver and human placenta. The amino acid exchanges were observed at positions: 91 (Asp-->Glu), 217 (Thr-->Ala), 352 (Lys-->Glu).
92	NR	8643403	A single nucleotide change, G to A, at nucleotide position 1093 of E. coli 23S ribosomal RNA was found to cause UGA-specific suppression (D.K. Jemiolo, F.T. Pagel and E.J. Murgola, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, in press). To obtain new kinds of UGA-specific suppressors in 23S rRNA, we used segment-directed mutagenic PCR, and targeted first the 1405 nucleotide SnaBI/I-CeuI segment, which includes position 1093, of the rrnB operon cloned into a multicopy plasmid. The mutagenized fragments were subcloned into the plasmid vector and used to transform to ampicillin resistance (Ampr) a recipient strain containing a UGA mutation in trpA. The Ampr transformants were then screened for suppression of UGA. After purification, Trp+ transformants were tested for association of the suppressor phenotype first with the plasmid and then specifically with the SnaBI/I-CeuI fragment. In one screening, four different kinds of mutational change were found, all at three sites within a highly conserved hexanucleotide loop in domain II of 23S rRNA. This region is part of the site for binding of the large subunit protein L11, which has been shown to be involved in peptide chain termination in a specific way. All of the mutants (G1093A, G1093 delta, A1095 delta, and U1097 delta) suppress UGA mutations, but not UAA or UAG mutations, and all four types exhibit high-temperature conditional lethality when highly expressed. Several mechanisms can be suggested for the UGA-specific suppression exhibited by these mutants, including altered interaction with protein L11, Second-site mutations that overcome the conditional lethality of G1093A indicate that intramolecular interactions within 23S rRNA may play a role in peptide chain termination at the UGA stop codon.
92	NR	8643396	Ribosomal protein L11 recognizes a highly conserved, 58 nucleotide domain of large subunit ribosomal RNA. This domain has a set of tertiary interactions that are specifically stabilized by Mg2+ and NH4+ ions. The protein recognizes this tertiary structure, in the sense that ions stabilizing the tertiary structure also promote L11 binding, and a heat stable form of the protein (from Bacillus stearothermophilus) prevents RNA unfolding. We also find that these RNA-binding properties are confined to a approximately 75 amino acid domain of the protein. The larger issue of L11 function within the ribosome is discussed in light of these findings.
92	NR	7715456	The prmA gene, located at 72 min on the Escherichia coli chromosome, is the genetic determinant of ribosomal protein L11-methyltransferase activity. Mutations at this locus, prmA1 and prmA3, result in a severely undermethylated form of L11. No effect, other than the lack of methyl groups on L11, has been ascribed to these mutations. DNA sequence analysis of the mutant alleles prmA1 and prmA3 detected point mutations near the C-terminus of the protein and plasmids overproducing the wild-type and the two mutant proteins have been constructed. The wild-type PrmA protein could be crosslinked to its radiolabelled substrate, S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM), by u.v. irradiation indicating that it is the gene for the methyltransferase rather than a regulatory protein. One of the mutant proteins, PrmA3, was also weakly crosslinked to SAM. Both mutant enzymes when expressed from the overproducing plasmids were capable of catalysing the incorporation of 3H-labelled methyl groups from SAM to L11 in vitro. This confirmed the observation that the mutant proteins possess significant residual activity which could account for their lack of growth phenotype. However, a strain carrying an in vitro-constructed null mutation of the prmA gene, transferred to the E. coli chromosome by homologous recombination, was perfectly viable.
92	NR	7966335	We have cloned and sequenced four ribosomal protein genes from the extreme thermophilic archaeon Sulfolobus acidocaldarius P1. These genes code for proteins equivalent to L11, L1, L10 and L12 from Escherichia coli. The genes for the Sulfolobus L11, L1, L10 and L12 proteins are arranged in the same order as the equivalent genes in E. coli, i.e. L11-L1-L10-L12, and are transcribed as a single unit. Sequences resembling the consensus sequence for archaeal promoters have been detected upstream of the transcription initiation site. Transcription ends at several sites following a pyrimidine-rich region. The genes for proteins L11, L10 and L1 start with unusual initiation codons: GUG in the case of the L1 and L10 genes; and UUG in the case of L11. There are overlapping stop/start codons between the L11 and L1 genes, and between the L1 and L10, suggesting that the translation of the four genes might be coupled as in the bacteria.
92	NR	7925357	The thiostrepton-resistance gene encoding the 23S rRNA A1067 methyltransferase from Streptomyces azureus has been overexpressed in Escherichia coli using a T7-RNA-polymerase-dependent expression vector. The protein was efficiently expressed at levels up to 20% of total soluble protein and purified to near homogeneity. Kinetic parameters for S-adenosyl-L-methionine (Km = 0.1 mM) and an RNA fragment containing nucleotides 1029-1122 of the 23S ribosomal RNA from E. coli (Km = 0.001 mM) were determined. S-Adenosyl-L-homocysteine showed competitive product inhibition (Ki = 0.013 mM). Binding of either thiostrepton or protein L11 inhibited methylation. RNA sequence variants of the RNA fragment with mutations in nucleotides 1051-1108 were tested as substrates for the methylase. The experimental data indicate that methylation is dependent on the secondary structure of the hairpin including nucleotide A1067 and the exact sequence U(1066)-A(1067)-G(1068)-A(1069)-A(1070) of the single strand.
92	NR	7545948	Changes in expression of ribosomal protein genes during growth and stationary phase of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2) in liquid medium were studied. Proteins being synthesized were pulse-labelled with [35S]-methionine, separated by two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and quantified using the BioImage computer software. Most of the ribosomal proteins were synthesized throughout the life cycle. Exceptions were two proteins whose synthesis drastically decreased at the approach of stationary phase. These two proteins were identified in purified ribosomes as homologues of Escherichia coli ribosomal proteins L10 and L7/L12, using antibodies raised against fusion proteins between these ribosomal proteins and Escherichia coli beta-galactosidase. The genes (rplJ and rplL) encoding the L10 and L7/L12 proteins were contained in a 1.2 kb BamHI fragment that was cloned and sequenced. The linkage and order of the genes coincide with other L10-L7/L12 operons. However, L11 and L1 genes were not present immediately upstream of the L10 gene, as is the case for E. coli and other bacteria. Instead, two open reading frames of unknown function were found immediately upstream of the L10 gene, in an adjacent 1.9 kb BamHI fragment.
92	NR	8007008	Available sequences that correspond to the E. coli ribosomal proteins L11, L1, L10, and L12 from eubacteria, archaebacteria, and eukaryotes have been aligned. The alignments were analyzed qualitatively for shared structural features and for conservation of deletions or insertions. The alignments were further subjected to quantitative phylogenetic analysis, and the amino acid identity between selected pairs of sequences was calculated. In general, eubacteria, archaebacteria, and eukaryotes each form coherent and well-resolved nonoverlapping phylogenetic domains. The degree of diversity of the four proteins between the three groups is not uniform. For L11, the eubacterial and archaebacterial proteins are very similar whereas the eukaryotic L11 is clearly less similar. In contrast, in the case of the L12 proteins and to a lesser extent the L10 proteins, the archaebacterial and eukaryotic proteins are similar whereas the eubacterial proteins are different. The eukaryotic L1 equivalent protein has yet to be identified. If the root of the universal tree is near or within the eubacterial domain, our ribosomal protein-based phylogenies indicate that archaebacteria are monophyletic. The eukaryotic lineage appears to originate either near or within the archaebacterial domain.
92	NR	7508514	Photoaffinity-labeling experiments using three nitroguaiacol ether streptomycin derivatives with spacers of different lengths between the antibiotic and the photoreactive moiety (8, 12 and 17 A) allow us to: (1) unambiguously locate the boundaries of the antibiotic binding site; and (2) test the topographical consistency of the photolabeling results. The streptomycin binding site is located in the interface between the ribosomal subunits, close to proteins S5 in the 30 S and to L11 in the 50 S ribosomal subunits. This location explains most of the antibiotic's pleiotropic effects on protein biosynthesis, especially those related to the tRNA selection mechanism, and it also correlates with the location of the ribosomal components involved in the different streptomycin phenotypes.
92	NR	8288536	The mechanisms for regulation of ribosomal gene expression have been characterized in eukaryotes and eubacteria, but not yet in archaebacteria. We have studied the regulation of the synthesis of ribosomal proteins MvaL1, MvaL10, and MvaL12, encoded by the MvaL1 operon of Methanococcus vannielii, a methanogenic archaebacterium. MvaL1, the homolog of the regulatory protein L1 encoded by the L11 operon of Escherichia coli, was shown to be an autoregulator of the MvaL1 operon. As in E. coli, regulation takes place at the level of translation. The target site for repression by MvaL1 was localized by site-directed mutagenesis to a region within the coding sequence of the MvaL1 gene commencing about 30 bases downstream of the ATG initiation codon. The MvaL1 binding site on the mRNA exhibits similarity in both primary sequence and secondary structure to the L1 regulatory target site of E. coli and to the putative binding site for MvaL1 on the 23S rRNA. In contrast to other regulatory systems, the putative MvaL1 binding site is located in a sequence of the mRNA which is not in direct contact with the ribosome as part of the initiation complex. Furthermore, the untranslated leader sequence is not involved in the regulation. Therefore, we suggest that a novel mechanism of translational feedback regulation exists in M. vannielii.
92	NR	8145758	Several oligonucleotides complementary to different 23S RNA regions were tested in the elongation factor-dependent reactions of the ribosomes. It was found that the 1088-1100 and 1127-1140 sequence parts of the 23S RNA (binding regions for the L11 protein) are very important for EF-G function. The EF-Tu function is markedly less affected by these nucleotides. The probable role of 23S RNA function is discussed.
93	PR	12898574	The correlation between the D4 dopamine receptor gene (DRD4) and the D2 dopamine receptor gene (DRD2) polymorphisms was investigated with personality traits. For this study, homogeneous population consisting of 243 young alcohol- and drug-naive Koreans who were blood-unrelated with a mean age (+/-SD) of 13.87 (+/-0.30) years old was analyzed for the DRD4 and the DRD2 polymorphisms with their personality trait by Temperament and character inventory (TCI). The association between Novelty seeking (NS) score and DRD4 long alleles was only observed among the female subjects (t = 2.11, P = 0.037), but not in the male counter part. Female subjects who carried the DRD2 less frequent alleles (TaqI A1, TaqI B1, and Intron6 1) showed higher RD4 scores (dependence vs. independence) of Reward dependence (RD) than those without these alleles (P < 0.05). There was no interaction between DRD4 and DRD2 on the personality traits. These results, thus, confirmed the previous findings in which the long repeats of the DRD4-exon III polymorphism are related to NS personality trait, and also suggested that the DRD2 less frequent alleles were also associated with the reward-dependent trait.
93	DR	12888781	Separate investigations have suggested that olanzapine, a D4 antagonist, decreases craving after a priming dose of alcohol and that the DRD4 variable number of tandem repeats (VNTR) polymorphism influences the expression of craving after a priming dose of alcohol. The present study tested the hypothesis that olanzapine may be differentially effective at reducing cue-elicited craving based on individual differences in DRD4 VNTR in a sample of heavy social drinkers. Participants were randomly assigned to receive olanzapine (5 mg) or a control medication (cyproheptadine, 4 mg) prior to consuming three alcoholic drinks. Participants completed subjective measures of craving and euphoria after each drink. Participants who were homozygous or heterozygous for the 7 (or longer) repeat allele of the DRD4 VNTR were classified as DRD4 L, while the other participants were classified as DRD4 S. The findings indicated that olanzapine reduces craving for alcohol at baseline for both DRD4 S and DRD4 L individuals, but only reduces craving after exposure to alcohol cues and after a priming dose of alcohol for DRD4 L individuals.
93	NR	12434033	NA
93	DR	12393313	In 1998 a gene bank project for association studies in alcoholism was initiated at the Psychiatric Hospital of Munich. The research instruments used were partly adopted from the US collaborative study of the genetics of alcoholism and include the family history assessment module (FHAM), the semi-structured interview for assessment of genetics in alcoholism (SSAGA) and a number of personality inventories such as the Zuckerman's sensation-seeking scale, the NEO Five factor inventory and the temperament and character inventory. Based on the examination of 181 alcoholic subjects, no association was found between Dopamine D4 receptor gene polymorphism and novelty-seeking or extraversion as assessed by the three personality inventories. These findings are in line with a number of more recent studies questioning the association between novelty-seeking and DRD4 dopamine receptor gene polymorphism. Possible implications of these findings are discussed.
93	DR	11950104	Recent research has suggested that alterations in mesolimbic dopamine neurotransmission are central to the development and expression of craving for alcohol. Because the D4 dopamine receptor gene, variable numbers of tandem repeats (DRD4 VNTR) polymorphism putatively expresses functional differences in dopamine receptors, the present study tested whether this polymorphism influences the effects of a priming dose of alcohol on craving. Participants consumed 3 alcoholic drinks or 3 control drinks and completed measures of craving after each drink. Participants who were homozygous or heterozygous for the 7 (or longer) repeat allele were classified as DRD4 L, whereas the other participants were classified as DRD4 S. Results suggested that DRD4 L participants demonstrated significantly higher craving after consumption of alcohol as compared with the control beverage.
93	DR	11860516	The prefrontal cortex receives a major dopaminergic input from the ventral tegmental area, which plays an important role in the integration of neuronal signals influencing behavioural responses to stressful environmental stimuli. The dopamine D4 receptor (D4R) is expressed at highest levels in the prefrontal cortex and is the predominant D2-like receptor localized in this brain area. To investigate the functional significance of D4Rs in dopamine-mediated responses we have analysed a strain of mice lacking this receptor subtype (Drd4-/-). Wild-type and Drd4-/- mice were challenged in two different approach/avoidance conflict paradigms: the elevated plus maze and the light/dark preference exploration test. By these behavioural measures Drd4-/- mice showed heightened avoidance to the more fear-provoking areas of each maze as demonstrated by reduced exploration of the open arms of the plus maze and longer latencies to explore the illuminated compartment of the light/dark shuttle box. These exaggerated avoidance behaviours were further enhanced by an additional handling stress but completely prevented by anxiolytic agents such as the benzodiazepine midazolam and ethanol. Although Drd4-/- mice displayed heightened anxiety, they exhibited normal ethanol preference and consumption in a two-bottle choice test. Learned fear responses evaluated by contextual, cued and instrumental fear-conditioning tests showed no difference between wild-type and Drd4-/- mice. Taken together these results indicate that the absence of D4Rs increases avoidance behaviour to unconditioned stimuli and does not impair behavioural reactions to Pavlovian fear-conditioning, suggesting that the D4R could play a key role in the dopaminergic modulation of cortical signals triggered by environmental stimuli.
93	PR	11817497	The dopamine (DA) D2 family of receptors consists of the D2, D3, and D4 receptors. The DA D4 receptor is of interest as a target for drugs to treat schizophrenia based upon its high affinity for the atypical antipsychotic clozapine and its localization to the limbic and cortical regions of the brain. As part of a program to identify novel DA D4 receptor antagonists, a high-volume screen using the Parke-Davis compound library was initiated. This led to the discovery of PD 89211 (benzenemethanol, 2-chloro-4-[4-[(1H-benzimidazol-2-yl)methyl]-1-piperzinyl]) that displaced [3H]spiperone binding to hD4.2 with an affinity (Ki) of 3.7 nM. PD 89211 exhibited high selectivity for the DA D4.2 receptor (> 800-fold) as compared to other hDA receptor subtypes, rat brain serotonin, and adrenergic receptors. In vitro, PD 89211 had D4 receptor antagonist activity reversing quinpirole-induced [3H]thymidine uptake in CHOpro5 cells (IC50 = 2.1 nM). Limited structure-activity relationship (SAR) studies indicated that compounds with a 4-chloro-, 4-methyl-, and 3-chloro- substituents on the phenyl ring retained high affinity for D4 receptors, while those with a 4-methoxy- and no substituent had less affinity. While all clinically effective antipsychotics increase DA synthesis (DOPA accumulation) in rodents, PD 89211 did not increase DA synthesis in the DA-enriched striatum, indicating no effect on DA turnover and low propensity for exhibiting motor side effects. However, it did increase catecholamine synthesis in rat hippocampus, as did clozapine. Moreover, PD 89211 selectivity increased catecholamine synthesis in the hippocampus of wild type but not in mice lacking D4 receptors, suggesting that one function of D4 receptors may be to modulate DA/norepinephrine (NE) turnover in this brain area known to possess D4 receptors. The discovery of compounds like PD 89211 provides a tool to help in understanding the function of DA D4 receptors in the CNS.
93	PR	11697748	The purpose of our study was to examine the effects of D1-and D2-dopamine receptors blockade on the changes in the ventricular content of catecholamines in rats withdrawn from morphine. Rats were given morphine by subcutaneous (s.c.) implantation of morphine pellets for 5 days. On the eighth day, morphine withdrawal was induced by s.c. administration of naloxone (1 mg/kg), and rats were killed 30 min later. Pretreatment with SCH 23390 (dopamine D1, D5 receptor antagonist) 15 min prior to naloxone administration suppressed some the behavioural signs of morphine withdrawal, whereas eticlopride (dopamine D2, D3, D4 receptor antagonist) did not. In addition, biochemical analysis indicate that SCH 23390 completely abolished the withdrawal-induced increase in noradrenaline and dopamine turnover in the right ventricle. By contrast, eticlopride did not block the hyperactivity of catecholaminergic neurons in the heart during morphine withdrawal. These data suggest that the hyperactivity of catecholaminergic neurons in the heart during morphine withdrawal is dependent upon D1 dopamine receptor activation. In addition, our results exclude the involvement of D2 dopamine receptors.
93	NR	11487630	Oxidative stress is thought to be the cause of nerve cell death in many CNS pathologies, including ischemia, trauma, and neurodegenerative disease. Glutamate kills nerve cells that lack ionotropic glutamate receptors via the inhibition of the cystine-glutamate antiporter x(c)(-), resulting in the inhibition of cystine uptake, the loss of glutathione, and the initiation of an oxidative stress cell death pathway. A number of catecholamines were found to block this pathway. Specifically, dopamine and related ligands inhibit glutamate-induced cell death in both clonal nerve cell lines and rat cortical neurons. The protective effects of dopamine, apomorphine, and apocodeine, but not epinephrine and norepinephrine, are antagonized by dopamine D4 antagonists. A dopamine D4 agonist also protects, and this protective effect is inhibited by U101958, a dopamine D4 antagonist. Although the protective effects of some of the catecholamines are correlated with their antioxidant activities, there is no correlation between the protective and antioxidant activities of several other ligands. Normally, glutamate causes an increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS) and intracellular Ca(2+). Apomorphine partially inhibits glutamate-induced ROS production and blocks the opening of cGMP-operated Ca(2+) channels that lead to Ca(2+) elevation in the late part of the cell death pathway. These data suggest that the protective effects of apomorphine on oxidative stress-induced cell death are, at least in part, mediated by dopamine D4 receptors via the regulation of cGMP-operated Ca(2+) channels.
93	DR	11347517	Given the spectacular advances of genetics during the last five years, it seems appropriate to revisit the important subject of genetics of alcoholism and substance abuse. In recent studies alcohol abuse was shown to have an hereditability of roughly 38%, whereas psychostimulant and opiate use exhibit hereditabilities of 11 to 45%. The hereditability of smoking was found to be around 50%. There is a strong comorbidity between alcoholism and smoking. More than 80% of alcoholics smoke cigarettes in the U.S.A. Other genetic methods such as linkage analysis, allele sharing methods, association studies and analysis of inbred, transgenic and gene-knockout rodents, have partially agreed in showing that the 5HT-1B serotonin receptor and the DRD1, DRD2 and DRD4 dopamine receptors, as well as the dopamine transporter DAT, play an important role in behaviors related to alcoholism and substance abuse. Some neurochemical markers, as for example monoamine oxidase and adenylate cyclase have also been implicated in addictive disorders. The aldehyde dehydrogenase allele ALDH2*2 has a protective effect against alcoholism. Two whole genome linkage studies have shown linkage to chromosomal regions that are in the proximity of the DRD4 dopamine receptor, the GABA receptor gene cluster and the alcohol dehydrogenase gene cluster.
93	NR	11317218	alpha(2) adrenergic receptors are activated by adrenaline and noradrenaline, and three subtypes (ie, A, B, C) have differential affinities for antagonists and medications. The alpha(2c) adrenergic receptor (ADRA2C), located on chromosome 4p16.3, is a candidate gene for schizophrenia because it binds clozapine, an atypical neuroleptic useful for treatment-resistant schizophrenia. In addition, ADRA2C binds clonidine which is prescribed for three psychiatric diseases. This report communicates the findings of the genetic scanning of this gene of very tough GC content. The complete coding sequences and splice junctions were scanned with [DOVAM]-S in 104 schizophrenics, and pilot probes of patients with alcoholism (41 patients), cocaine abuse (25 patients), puerperal psychosis (30 patients), attention deficient/hyperactivity disorder (25 patients) and autism (25 patients). Six sequence variants were found, including five silent polymorphisms (allele frequencies 0.6--25%) and an in-frame deletion of a homologous repeat at nucleotides 967--978 (ie, TIDRU(1)). Genotyping of the normal two repeat unit of the Third Intracytoplasmic Domain Repeat Unit (TIDRU(2)) and the deleted variant (TIDRU(1)) revealed that TIDRU(1) had allelic frequencies of 39% (11/28) and 3.5% (6/172) in African-American and Caucasian schizophrenics, respectively, and it occurred with equal frequency in controls (44%, 31/70 and 3.0%, 6/198). TIDRU(1) occurs at a location similar to the third intracytoplasmic 48-nucleotide repeat unit in the DRD4 that is associated with ADHD. Although these data do not suggest an association of TIDRU(1) with schizophrenia, additional studies are needed to see whether TIDRU(1) confers a clinical phenotype.
93	DR	11244477	NA
93	DR	11163121	Both molecular genetic factors (the D2 dopamine receptor (DRD2) and the D4 dopamine receptor (DRD4) polymorphisms) and environmental influences of living in an alcoholic or nonalcoholic home on the personality traits of Extraversion and Neuroticism were assessed in drug-naive, young adolescent boys. There were no significant main effects of genetic or environmental factors on either Neuroticism or Extraversion as measured by the Junior Eysenck Personality Inventory (JEPI). However, a significant interaction between DRD2 (but not DRD4) alleles and environmental variables was observed on Extraversion. Specifically, children with the minor alleles of the DRD2 gene showed a significantly greater Extraversion score when living in an alcoholic than in a nonalcoholic home. In contrast, children with the major alleles of the DRD2 gene showed a trend in the opposite direction. Although the results are preliminary and pending replication, they nevertheless provide the first report of a specific gene-environment interaction involving a human personality trait.
93	DR	11105655	The dopaminergic and opioidergic reward pathways of the brain are critical for survival since they provide the pleasure drives for eating, love and reproduction; these are called 'natural rewards' and involve the release of dopamine in the nucleus accumbens and frontal lobes. However, the same release of dopamine and production of sensations of pleasure can be produced by 'unnatural rewards' such as alcohol, cocaine, methamphetamine, heroin, nicotine, marijuana, and other drugs, and by compulsive activities such as gambling, eating, and sex, and by risk taking behaviors. Since only a minority of individuals become addicted to these compounds or behaviors, it is reasonable to ask what factors distinguish those who do become addicted from those who do not. It has usually been assumed that these behaviors are entirely voluntary and that environmental factors play the major role; however, since all of these behaviors have a significant genetic component, the presence of one or more variant genes presumably act as risk factors for these behaviors. Since the primary neurotransmitter of the reward pathway is dopamine, genes for dopamine synthesis, degradation, receptors, and transporters are reasonable candidates. However, serotonin, norepinephrine, GABA, opioid, and cannabinoid neurons all modify dopamine metabolism and dopamine neurons. We have proposed that defects in various combinations of the genes for these neurotransmitters result in a Reward Deficiency Syndrome (RDS) and that such individuals are at risk for abuse of the unnatural rewards. Because of its importance, the gene for the [figure: see text] dopamine D2 receptor was a major candidate gene. Studies in the past decade have shown that in various subject groups the Taq I A1 allele of the DRD2 gene is associated with alcoholism, drug abuse, smoking, obesity, compulsive gambling, and several personality traits. A range of other dopamine, opioid, cannabinoid, norepinephrine, and related genes have since been added to the list. Like other behavioral disorders, these are polygenically inherited and each gene accounts for only a small per cent of the variance. Techniques such as the Multivariate Analysis of Associations, which simultaneously examine the contribution of multiple genes, hold promise for understanding the genetic make up of polygenic disorders.
93	PR	11058499	NA
93	NR	10876119	Dopamine receptors previously identified in corpora allata (CA) of Manduca sexta last instars on the basis of dopamine effects on JH (juvenile hormone)/JH acid biosynthesis and cyclic AMP (cAMP) accumulation, were characterized pharmacologically. For this study, a broad spectrum of agonists or antagonists of D1, D2, D3 or D4 dopamine receptors, together with the dopamine metabolite N-acetyl-dopamine, other neurotransmitters and their agonists/antagonists, were tested for their effects on gland activity and cAMP production. The lack of effect of other neurotransmitters supports the specificity of the effect of dopamine and the dopamine specificity of the receptors. Only the D2 receptor antagonist spiperone had a potent effect on JH biosynthesis and cAMP formation by CA taken on day 0 of the last stadium, when dopamine stimulates both activities and thus appears to be acting via a D1-like receptor. Several other D2 receptor antagonists, and D1, D2/D1 and D4,3/D2 receptor antagonists were less effective. Thus, the D1-like receptor of the Manduca CA appears to be distinct pharmacologically from vertebrate D1 receptors. By contrast, a number of D2 agonists/antagonists had a significant effect on JH acid biosynthesis and cAMP production by the CA from day 6 of the last stadium, when dopamine inhibits both activities and thus appears to be acting via a D2-like receptor. Certain D1-specific agonists/antagonists were equally effective. The Manduca D2-like receptor therefore bears some pharmacological resemblance to vertebrate D2 receptors. N-acetyl dopamine acted as a dopamine agonist with day 6 CA, the first identified function for an N-acetylated biogenic amine in insects. Dopamine was found to have the same differential affect on the formation of cAMP in homogenates of day 0 and day 6 brains as it did with CA, and in the same concentration range. Dopamine receptor agonists/antagonists affecting cAMP formation by day 0 and day 6 CA homogenates had similar effects with brain homogenates. By contrast, dopamine only stimulated cAMP formation by homogenates of day 0 and day 6 abdominal or ventral nerve cord. These results suggest that D1- and D2-like dopamine receptors of Manduca are regionally as well as temporally localized.
93	PR	10832611	It has been difficult to observe functional coupling of the D4 receptor to second messenger systems and a robust functional assay system for this receptor is still lacking. In the present study, the rat dopamine D4 receptor was cloned from rat retina. Sequence comparison revealed identity with the published sequence of Ashgari and co-workers, including the two amino acid insertions (V-Q) at position 92 which are not present in the published sequence of O'Malley and coworkers. The rat dopamine D4 receptor was stably expressed in Chinese hamster lung fibroblast CCL39 cells. [3H]spiperone saturation binding yielded a Bmax of 2,370+/-546 fmol/mg protein and a pKD of 8.74+/-0.14 (n=4). Forskolin-stimulated cAMP accumulation was inhibited by dopamine (Emax 61+/-1% inhibition of forskolin-stimulated levels, pEC50 7.33+/-0.06, n=23). A similar concentration-dependent inhibition was observed with the dopamine D2-like receptor agonists quinpirole and 7-OH-DPAT which elicited nearly the same Emax as dopamine. By contrast, apomorphine and a number of compounds with reported affinity for human dopamine D4 receptors (PD168077, U-101958, SDZ GLC 756, L-745,870 and NGD 94-1) behaved as partial agonists (Emax ranging between 26% and 56% of that of dopamine). The agonist effect of dopamine was completely blocked by preincubation with pertussis toxin, no further accumulation of cAMP above the forskolin-stimulated levels being observed. Antagonist pKB-values obtained against dopamine in this system were: 8.55+/-0.19 (n=3) for the partial agonist L-745,870, 8.38+/-0.23 (n=5) for spiperone, 7.18+/-0.17 (n=4) for haloperidol, 7.04+/-0.13 (n=4) for clozapine and <6 for raclopride. Other functional assays applicable were stimulation of [35S]GTPgammaS binding, extracellular acidification rate and a serum-responsive element using luciferase expression as a reporter gene. However, the receptor did not couple to phosphatidylinositol turnover or to intracellular Ca2+. Thus, expression of the rat dopamine D4 receptor in CCL39 cells provided several functional assay systems, of which inhibition of cAMP appeared to be the most robust one. These functional models can be used to evaluate the activity of compounds at the rat dopamine D4 receptor.
93	DR	10776673	BACKGROUND: The dopaminergic system may be involved in the development of alcoholism. As part of our ongoing studies on the association between alcoholism and dopaminergic genes, we report herein a mutation analysis of the 14-3-3 eta chain gene (YWHAH) and an association study between alcoholism and the YWHAH and dopamine D4 receptor gene (DRD4) polymorphisms. METHODS: Nucleotide mutations were investigated using single-strand conformation polymorphism methods. Associations were analyzed using a case-control design involving 185 Japanese alcoholics and 286 Japanese controls. RESULTS: Five polymorphisms, -147G>A, -134(GCCTGCA)2-4, IVS1+31(G)7-8, IVS1+73-74ins(G), and 753A>G, were detected on the YWHAH, and three of them were novel. No significant associations were found between alcoholism and these polymorphisms or two additional polymorphisms on DRD4 exon III and DRD4 -521C/T. CONCLUSIONS: YWHAH and DRD4 do not appear to play a major role in the development of alcoholism.
93	PR	10591536	The human dopamine D4 receptor is a D2-like receptor which is a target for most common neuroleptics. Previous investigations have shown that this receptor displays a large polymorphic variation in the third intracellular loop involving a variable number of direct imperfect tandem repeats (VNTR) of 16 amino acids. The shortest and longest repeat variants reported to date contain two and 10 repeat units (D4.2 and D4.10). No major pharmacological differences have been reported for the most common variants of this receptor (D4.2, D4.4 and D4.7), although the D4.7 was reported by us to display a slightly lower potency for dopamine in functional assays. Direct pharmacological and functional comparison of the longest and shortest variants in this study suggest no major discrepancies in pharmacological or functional profile between both receptors. Both receptors display, on average, a 15-fold and 90-fold lower potency for epinephrine and norepinephrine, respectively, compared with dopamine. We observed small increases in functional potency and affinity for dopamine and quinpirole at the D4.10 receptor variant compared with the D4.2 receptor. Our data indicate that there is no direct relationship between the length of the polymorphism and changes in pharmacology or functional activity. These findings are a suitable caution against the arbitrary pooling of D4 receptor VNTR genotypes in genetic studies, based on length.
93	DR	10581489	The purpose of the present study was to evaluate two polymorphisms near the D2 receptor gene (TaqI A RFLP and C microsatellite) and a VNTR for D4. A nonparametric linkage (NPL) technique, SIBPAL, was used to test for the presence or absence of linkage in 54 multiplex alcoholic families. These families had been ascertained through two alcoholic proband siblings in order to increase the density of alcoholic cases within these pedigrees. Phenotypic definitions of alcoholism were manipulated in an effort to determine the impact of severity (signs of physical dependence, early age of onset, presence of antisocial personality disorder) on the likelihood of finding positive evidence for linkage. A regression analysis that simultaneously evaluated the allele sharing identical by descent for Feighner criteria alcoholism in affected, unaffected, and discordant sib pairs (SIBPAL) for two D2 polymorphisms and the D4 polymorphism gave no evidence for linkage. Phenotypes associated with greater alcoholism severity (presence of physical dependence symptoms, earlier onset, or comorbid antisocial personality disorder) revealed some evidence for linkage. The presence of one or more physical dependence symptoms in combination with Feighner criteria alcoholism provided some evidence favoring linkage (TaqI A and D4). Alcoholics with an earlier onset of alcoholism showed some evidence for linkage especially when the presence of physical dependence was required (e. g., morning drinking, wanted to stop drinking but could not, binges or benders, and evidence of withdrawal symptoms). Finally, alcoholics with antisocial personality disorder differed significantly in their allele sharing from nonalcoholics for both D2 polymorphisms. Am. J. Med. Genet. (Neuropsychiatr. Genet.) 88:676-685, 1999.
93	DR	10581482	Activation of the mesolimbic dopamine pathway appears to promote drug- and alcohol-seeking behavior in laboratory animals. Results for association and linkage analysis between various alcohol dependence phenotypes and the dopamine receptors have been quite mixed. Similarly, both positive and negative results have been presented concerning dopamine receptor genes and temperament. Cloninger has postulated that the novelty seeking factor from the Tridimensional Personality Questionnaire (TPQ) may be related to the dopamine neurotransmitter system. As novelty seeking is a trait of some importance for substance-dependent individuals, our goal was to test this relationship within a sample of families of alcoholics. No evidence favoring linkage between D2, D4, or DAT1 was found for TPQ novelty seeking. However, the harm-avoidance trait from the TPQ showed evidence for linkage to both the D4 and one of the D2 loci (TaqI A). The Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire (MPQ) was used to provide converging evidence for these results. The TPQ harm-avoidance scale loads heavily on introversion (worry, pessimism, shyness), characteristics that may be especially salient in alcoholic families. Thus, planned comparisons were made between selected MPQ traits measuring the affective dimension (negative affectivity, stress reaction, alienation, and well-being). We find evidence favoring linkage between the D2 and D4 receptor loci and these MPQ traits, with stronger evidence being seen for the D2 polymorphisms. Am. J. Med. Genet. (Neuropsychiatr. Genet.) 88:634-641, 1999.
93	DR	10551544	The presence of the seven-repeat allele of the VNTR in the exon 3 of the dopamine D4 receptor gene (DRD4) has been associated in healthy subjects to the personality trait of novelty seeking. The present study focuses these observations on a sample of Brazilian male alcoholics, evaluated on the temperament dimensions originally described by Cloninger. The genotypes observed are in agreement with those expected under Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Subjects with the seven-repeat allele manifest lower harm avoidance scores. No significant differences between subjects with or without the seven-repeat allele in the scores of novelty seeking or reward dependence were observed. The lack of association between novelty seeking and the DRD4 exon 3 polymorphism is further corroborated by the fact that the comorbid antisocial personality disorder is not associated to the presence of the seven-repeat allele. These results could be explained by a biological connection between the personality dimensions of novelty seeking and harm avoidance.
93	DR	10490712	To determine the role of genes in the chromosomal regions 11p15 and 4p12 in the development of alcohol dependence, a sample of alcoholics (n = 133) and normal controls (n = 89) were screened using polymorphisms in the dopamine D4 receptor (DRD4), tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), and GABA receptor beta1 (GABRbeta1) genes. Comparison of total alcoholics with normal controls for GABRbeta1 gene was highly significant (p = 0.004). The difference between type II alcoholics and normal controls for the same allele frequencies was also significant (p = 0.029). The allele distributions of the polymorphisms in the DRD4 and TH genes in alcoholics and normal controls were similar and their differences were not significant. Our association studies indicate that the GABRbeta1 gene may play a role in the development of alcoholism. Therefore, it is important to screen a sample of well-characterized alcoholics with functional polymorphisms in all of the GABAalpha receptor subunit genes and determine their relationship with alcoholism phenotypes. Results with TH and DRD4 genes indicate that these two genes may not play major roles in the development of alcoholism.
93	DR	10470981	BACKGROUND: Although dopamine D1 and D2 receptors have been implicated in ethanol's motivational effects, little is known about the contribution of dopamine D4 receptors. The present experiments examined the effects of clozapine, a dopamine D4 receptor antagonist, on ethanol's aversive, rewarding, stimulant, and reinforcing properties. METHODS: For taste conditioning, adult male Swiss-Webster mice received five conditioning trials consisting of 1-hr access to 0.2 M NaCl. After NaCl access on trials 1-4, subjects received clozapine (0, 1, or 2 mg/kg) followed 30 min later by 0, 2, or 4 g/kg ethanol. For place conditioning, Swiss-Webster mice received six pairings of a tactile stimulus with ethanol (2 g/kg, intraperitoneally), clozapine (1 mg/kg, intraperitoneally) + ethanol, or clozapine alone. Locomotor activity in a 30-min test was determined in Swiss-Webster mice receiving 0, 0.5, or 1.0 mg/kg clozapine and 0, 1, or 2 g/kg ethanol. In a drinking study, separate groups of adult male C57BL/6J mice were allowed 30-min access to either 10% v/v ethanol mixed in 10% w/v sucrose or 10% sucrose without ethanol. During testing, both groups were given 0 or 1 mg/kg clozapine 30 min before fluid access. RESULTS: Ethanol flavor pairings during taste conditioning reduced subsequent flavor intakes, indicating the development of conditioned taste aversion. Clozapine reduced the magnitude of 4 g/kg ethanol-conditioned aversion only on trial 4 at the 2 mg/kg dose. Conditioned place preference for the ethanol-paired stimulus was not altered by clozapine. Clozapine alone did not produce either conditioned preference or aversion. Ethanol-stimulated activity was reduced by clozapine treatment. However, clozapine alone did not alter locomotor activity levels. Clozapine reduced sucrose consumption but did not alter ethanol/sucrose intake. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that clozapine influences a limited range of ethanol-motivated behaviors. Specifically, dopamine D4 receptors appear important for ethanol's stimulant effect and possibly ethanol aversion, but not ethanol reward and reinforcement.
93	DR	10432864	NA
93	DR	10379515	Although the role of genetics in personality has been studied extensively at a phenomenological level, only lately has the investigation of specific genes been performed. Recent reports suggest that DNA variants of the dopamine D4 receptor gene (DRD4) are associated with the personality trait of novelty seeking; however, others fail to replicate this finding. Such conflicting results suggest either a weak effect, an association only in certain populations, or a false-positive resulting from population stratification. We provide a critical analysis of genetic studies of DRD4 variants with novelty seeking, alcoholism, drug abuse, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Evidence for the role of DRD4 in novelty seeking is inconclusive, with a number of methodological concerns. Use of more conservative statistical criteria for significance, employing gene haplotypes, as well as linkage disequilibrium studies, are recommended. The molecular biology of the D4 gene is also reviewed.
93	NR	10204543	We measured endogenous cannabinoid release in dorsal striatum of freely moving rats by microdialysis and gas chromatography/mass spectrometry. Neural activity stimulated the release of anandamide, but not of other endogenous cannabinoids such as 2-arachidonylglycerol. Moreover, anandamide release was increased eightfold over baseline after local administration of the D2-like (D2, D3, D4) dopamine receptor agonist quinpirole, a response that was prevented by the D2-like receptor antagonist raclopride. Administration of the D1-like (D1, D5) receptor agonist SKF38393 had no such effect. These results suggest that functional interactions between endocannabinoid and dopaminergic systems may contribute to striatal signaling. In agreement with this hypothesis, pretreatment with the cannabinoid antagonist SR141716A enhanced the stimulation of motor behavior elicited by systemic administration of quinpirole. The endocannabinoid system therefore may act as an inhibitory feedback mechanism countering dopamine-induced facilitation of motor activity.
93	NR	10049714	Dopamine D4-like binding sites are abundant in human cerebral cortex as detected by [3H]nemonapride. The extremely low density of D4 mRNA in human cerebral cortex is inconsistent with the high amount of D4-like binding sites. To investigate the nature of the D4-like receptors, [3H]nemonapride binding sites in the nonhuman primate cerebral cortex were characterized. Although [3H]nemonapride binding sites were D4-like, displaceable by clozapine but not raclopride, [3H]nemonapride binding was not displaced by selective D4 antagonists but was displaced by the selective 5-HT2A antagonist MDL100907. Using [3H]ketanserin as a 5-HT2A ligand, nemonapride showed high affinity for monkey (Ki = 10.4 nM) and cloned human (Ki = 9.4 nM) 5-HT2A receptors, while its affinity for rat receptors was lower (Ki = 140 nM). The present study demonstrates that cerebral cortical D4-like binding sites labeled by [3H]nemonapride in nonhuman primates consist of a very small portion of D4, but a substantial portion of 5-HT2A receptors. The unexpectedly high affinity of nemonapride for primate 5-HT2A receptor suggests reconsidering previous data from other studies using [3H]nemonapride, particularly those on D4-like receptors.
93	NR	9873377	PD 108635 (1) was identified as a potent dopamine D4 ligand and we wanted to replace the benzylic alcohol with a metabolically more stable moiety. Investigations led to the discovery of a series of isoindolinones having D4 affinity.
93	DR	9691193	Recent advances in molecular biology have resulted in a number of genetically manipulated mice with defined changes at dopamine receptor and the dopamine transporter (DAT) loci. Mice with targeted mutations at the D1 receptor (D1R) are growth-retarded and show downregulated expression of dynorphin and substance P. Behavioral assessment indicates that mutants have deficiencies in spatial learning and initiating movement, as well as in responding to novel stimuli. D1R mutants do not become locomotor activated with cocaine or show upregulated immediate early gene (IEG) expression, but D2 receptor-dependent IEG changes are intact. Acute cocaine administration increases substance P levels, suggesting that striatal expression of this neuropeptide can be modulated by D1R-independent processes. Failure of locomotor activation is also seen with repeated amphetamine treatment. Surprisingly, D1R-deficient mice retain cocaine-conditioned place preference. In contrast, D2 receptor knockout mice are bradykinetic, show increased striatal enkephalin expression and an absence of opiate rewarding effects. D3 receptor mutants are hyperactive when assessed in an exploratory assay and display reduced anxiety-associated behavior in an elevated plus maze test. The recently described D4 receptor homozygous mutants exhibit a reduction in baseline locomotor activity and were shown to be supersensitive to the locomotor activating effects of alcohol and psychostimulant drugs. As expected, DAT knockout mice are hyperactive and do not respond to cocaine or amphetamine. The observation that D2 and D4 dopamine receptor and DAT mutants show compensatory effects, together with the complicating issue of their hybrid genetic background may temper conclusions regarding the direct effects of the targeted mutation on phenotype.
93	NR	9689005	Dopamine inhibits Na+ and water reabsorption in the rat cortical collecting duct (CCD) in the presence of arginine vasopressin (AVP). This inhibition appears to involve the D4 dopamine receptor isoform, which inhibits cAMP production; however, the D1A receptor, which stimulates cAMP production, is also expressed in the CCD. To discriminate between these opposing effects, we measured cAMP production in intact CCD segments. The basal rate of cAMP production ranged from 6.5 to 10 fmol/mm of tubule length over a 7-min incubation period, and it was unaffected by either dopamine or the D1A-specific agonist fenoldopam. AVP increased cAMP production to the range of 85-153 fmol . mm-1 . 7 min-1. Whereas neither 0.1 nor 1.0 microM fenoldopam affected AVP-dependent cAMP production, dopamine reduced it in a dose-dependent manner, achieving a maximum inhibition of 50% at 10 microM. This effect was reversed by the D4 receptor antagonist clozapine but not by pimozide or spiperone (antagonists of D2 and D3 receptors) or by calphostin C or chelerythrine (inhibitors of protein kinase C). We conclude that dopamine inhibits transepithelial Na+ transport and osmotic water permeability in the presence of AVP by inhibition of cAMP production, which is mediated by the D4 receptor isoform linked via the inhibitory G protein Gi.
93	PR	9603615	The relationship of various dimensions of temperament, measured by the Tridimensional Personality Questionnaire (TPQ), to polymorphisms of the D2 dopamine receptor (DRD2) and D4 dopamine receptor (DRD4) genes was determined in 119 healthy Caucasian boys who had not yet begun to consume alcohol and other drugs of abuse. Total Novelty Seeking score of the TPQ was significantly higher in boys having, in common, all three minor (A1, B1, and Intron 6 1) alleles of the DRD2 compared to boys without any of these alleles. Boys with the DRD4 7 repeat (7R) allele also had a significantly higher Novelty Seeking score than those without this allele. However, the greatest difference in Novelty Seeking score was found when boys having all three minor DRD2 alleles and the DRD4 7R allele were contrasted to those without any of these alleles. Neither the DRD2 nor the DRD4 polymorphisms differentiated total Harm Avoidance score. Whereas subjects having all three minor DRD2 alleles had a significantly higher Reward Dependence 2 (Persistence) score than subjects without any of these alleles, no significant difference in this personality score was found between subjects with and without the DRD4 7R allele. In conclusion, DRD2 and DRD4 polymorphisms individually associate with Novelty Seeking behavior. However, the combined DRD2 and DRD4 polymorphisms contribute more markedly to this behavior than when these two gene polymorphisms are individually considered.
93	PR	9603607	To identify specific genes affecting vulnerability or resistance, we performed a whole-autosomal genome scan for genetic linkage to alcohol dependence in a Southwestern American Indian tribe. Genotypes at 517 autosomal microsatellite loci and clinical evaluations were available for 152 subjects belonging to extended pedigrees and forming 172 sib-pairs. Highly suggestive evidence for linkage emerged for two genomic regions using two- and multipoint sib-pair regression methods; both regions harbored neurogenetic candidate genes. The best evidence is seen with D11S1984 (nominal P = 0.00007, lod approximately equal to 3.1) on chromosome 11p, in close proximity to the DRD4 dopamine receptor and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) genes. Good evidence is seen with D4S3242 (nominal P = 0.0002, lod approximately equal to 2.8) on chromosome 4p, near the beta1 GABA receptor gene. Interestingly, three loci in the alcohol dehydrogenase gene cluster on chromosome 4q showed evidence for linkage with two-point analyses, but not multipoint analysis.
93	NR	9577832	NA
93	NR	9489994	Multiple genetic polymorphisms of the human dopamine D4 receptor (hD4R) have been identified including a 12 bp repeat in exon 1 associated with a psychotic condition called delusional disorder. Competition binding assays revealed minor pharmacological differences between the recombinant A1 (normal) and A2 (delusional) proteins with respect to quinpirole and the antipsychotic clozapine, however no functional differences were detected for receptor activation by dopamine, epinephrine, or norepinephrine. Our results suggest that this polymorphism may only confer susceptibility to delusional disorder in combination with other genetic or environmental factors.
93	DR	9433345	OBJECTIVE: In 1986 and 1987, Cloninger postulated the existence of the heritable behavioral trait of novelty seeking and its putative underpinnings in the dopaminergic systems of the ventral midbrain. Two widely reported studies found significant associations between novelty seeking and the type 4 dopamine receptor gene (DRD4), although a more recent study did not. The authors' objective was to investigate this association in two New Zealand samples. METHOD: The authors studied two nonoverlapping samples: subjects in a depression treatment trial (N = 86) and subjects from 14 pedigrees dense with alcoholism (N = 181). DRD4 genotyping was based on a standard protocol. RESULTS: Novelty seeking and DRD4 were not statistically associated. CONCLUSIONS: In these samples, there was no suggestion that the DRD4 polymorphism contributed to individual differences in the behavioral trait of novelty seeking.
93	DR	9406938	The steady-state levels of messenger RNA (mRNA) of five cloned dopamine (D) receptors were measured in five brain regions in rats in a recently developed animal model of 'behavioral dependence' on ethanol. One group of rats was given the choice between ethanol and water over a 9-month period and developed 'behavioral dependence' on ethanol (group a). This group was compared with a group given the choice between ethanol and water for only 2 months (not yet behaviorally dependent, group b), a group forced to consume ethanol as sole fluid over a 9-month period (not behaviorally dependent, group c) and ethanol-naive control rats. All groups were sacrificed 1 month after ethanol withdrawal. The concentrations of mRNA of D3-receptors in the limbic forebrain (which included the nucleus accumbens) were significantly lowered in groups a and b, but unchanged in group c. D3 mRNA levels were reduced in the hippocampus of group b and unchanged in the cortex, amygdala and striatum. No significant changes in the mRNA concentrations of D1-, D2-, D4- or D5-receptors were seen in the five brain regions in any group. In conclusion, chronic consumption of ethanol under the 'free-choice condition', which may best induce the drug-rewarding effect, leads to specific changes in the D3-receptor gene expression which were not seen after forced ethanol administration. Changes in D3 mRNA levels were, however, not a specific correlate of 'behavioral dependence', as they were also detected in rats not yet 'behaviorally dependent' (group b).
93	NR	9327945	NA
93	DR	9342196	A dysfunction of dopaminergic neurotansmission has been implicated in alcohol-seeking behavior. Recently, a significant association between the seven-repeat allele (DRD4*7R) of a 16 amino acid motif in the third exon of the dopamine D4 receptor gene (DRD4) and the personality trait of novelty seeking has been reported. Our population-based association study tested the hypothesis that the DRD4*7R variant predisposes to high levels of novelty seeking, which may underlie alcohol-seeking behavior. The genotypes of the expressed DRD4 exon III polymorphism were determined in 197 German controls and 252 German alcohol-dependent males, of whom 92 alcoholics completed the tridimensional personality questionnaire. We found no significant differences in the DRD4*7R frequencies between controls and alcoholics, including two subgroups (56 alcoholics with dissocial personality disorder according to ICD-10 and 89 alcoholics with severe withdrawal symptoms) with a high level of novelty seeking. The novelty-seeking scores did not differ significantly between alcoholics (including both subgroups) carrying long alleles with six or more repeats compared with those lacking long alleles. The present results do not provide evidence that the DRD4*7R allele contributes a common and relevant effect to alcohol-seeking behavior in our sample of alcoholics.
93	DR	9323127	The human dopamine D4 receptor (D4R) has received considerable attention because of its high affinity for the atypical antipsychotic clozapine and the unusually polymorphic nature of its gene. To clarify the in vivo role of the D4R, we produced and analyzed mutant mice (D4R-/-) lacking this protein. Although less active in open field tests, D4R-/- mice outperformed wild-type mice on the rotarod and displayed locomotor supersensitivity to ethanol, cocaine, and methamphetamine. Biochemical analyses revealed that dopamine synthesis and its conversion to DOPAC were elevated in the dorsal striatum from D4R-/- mice. Based on these findings, we propose that the D4R modulates normal, coordinated and drug-stimulated motor behaviors as well as the activity of nigrostriatal dopamine neurons.
93	NR	9280680	The neurochemistry of Parkinson's disease and other degenerative parkinsonisms is reviewed, emphasizing the changes described in the dopaminergic system. Presynaptic dopaminergic markers are reduced over the striatum in all these degenerative parkinsonisms, dopamine receptor changes being more heterogeneous. While in Parkinson's disease D1 and D2 receptors remain preserved as compared to controls, in progressive supranuclear palsy there is a loss of nigral D1 receptors and of striatal D2 receptors. This finding has also been described in striatonigral degeneration. There are no clear data about the status of D3, D4 and D5 dopamine receptors in these conditions. The alterations in other neurotransmission systems, cholinegic, adrenergic, serotoninergic and peptidergic are, in general, less dramatic, although they have not been studied in detail. To conclude, further studies are necessary in these field, in these moment, however, the preservation of striatal D2 dopamine receptors is the neurochemical finding with the best correlation with the response to levodopa or other dopaminergic agonists.
93	NR	9271339	The D2-like dopamine receptors couple to a variety of signal transduction pathways, including inhibition of adenylate cyclase, mitogenesis, and activation of potassium channels. Although these effects are mediated via pertussis toxin-sensitive G proteins, G(i/o), it is likely that some of these effects are influenced by the release of G protein betagamma subunits. Type II adenylate cyclase (ACII) is highly regulated by multiple biochemical stimuli, including protein kinase C, forskolin, G protein alpha subunits, and G protein betagamma subunits. The ability of betagamma subunits to activate this enzyme in the presence of activated alpha(s) has been particularly well characterized. Although stimulation by betagamma subunits has been described as conditional on the presence of activated alpha(s), betagamma subunits also potentiate ACII activity after activation of protein kinase C. We created stable cell lines expressing ACII and the D2L receptor, the D3 receptor, or the D4.4 receptor. Activation of D2L or D4.4 receptors, but not D3 receptors, potentiated beta-adrenergic receptor/Gs-stimulated activity of ACII, as measured by the intracellular accumulation of cAMP. Similarly, stimulation of D2L or D4.4 receptors potentiated phorbol ester-stimulated ACII activity in the absence of activated alpha(s), whereas stimulation of D3 receptors did not. The effect of D2-like receptor stimulation was blocked by pretreatment with pertussis toxin and by inhibition of protein kinase C. We propose that activation of both D2L and D4.4 dopamine receptors potentiated phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate-stimulated ACII activity through the release of betagamma subunits from pertussis toxin-sensitive G proteins. In contrast, the lack of D3 receptor-mediated effects suggests that stimulation of D3 receptors does not result in an appreciable release of betagamma subunits.
93	DR	9285967	We examined the association between gene polymorphisms related to central dopaminergic transmission and alcoholism in the Japanese population. Polymorphic gene loci examined included those encoding the dopamine D2 receptor (NcoI site and Ser-Cys site), the dopamine D3 receptor (BalI site), the dopamine D4 receptor (48 bp tandem repeat) and the dopamine transporter (40 bp tandem repeat). The genotype distribution at the NcoI site in the dopamine D2 receptor gene differed significantly (p < 0.5) between alcoholic patients and control subjects. The frequency of 7 repeats at the 40 bp/DAT tended to be higher (p < 0.1), and that of 9 repeats tended to be lower (p < 0.1) in alcoholic patients than in control subjects. The possible effects of dopamine-related gene polymorphisms, which might predispose individuals to alcoholism, are discussed.
93	NR	9223539	(R)-(+)-2-Amino-4-(4-fluorophenyl)-5-[1-[4-(4-fluorophenyl)-4-oxobutyl]+ ++pyrrolidin-3-yl]thiazole (NRA0045), a novel thiazole derivative, has high affinities for the human cloned dopamine D4.2, D4.4 and D4.7 receptors, with Ki values of 2.54, 0.55 and 0.54 nM, respectively. NRA0045 is approximately 91-fold more potent at the dopamine D4.2 receptor, compared with human cloned dopamine D2L receptor. NRA0045 also has high affinities for the serotonin (5-HT)2A receptor (Ki = 1.92 nM) and alpha-1 adrenoceptor (Ki = 1.40 nM) but weak affinities (IC50 values are approximately 1 microM) for six other neurotransmitter receptors (adenosine1, 5-HT1A, 5-HT1C, dopamine transporter, alpha2A and alpha2A) and negligible affinities (IC50 values are over 10(-5) M) for 42 other receptors, including neurotransmitters and hormones, ion channels and second messenger systems. Locomotor hyperactivity induced by methamphetamine (1 mg/kg i.p.) in mice was dose-dependently antagonized by NRA0045 (ED50 = 0.5 mg/kg i.p. and 1.9 mg/kg p.o., respectively). Methamphetamine (10 mg/kg i.p.)-induced stereotyped behavior in mice was dose-dependently antagonized by NRA0045, whereas NRA0045 did not exceed 50% inhibition even at the highest dose given (30 mg/kg i.p.). Catalepsy was dose-dependently and significantly induced by NRA0045 in rats, whereas NRA0045 did not exceed 50% induction even at the highest dose given (30 mg/kg i.p.). Thus NRA0045 blocks behaviors associated with activation of the mesolimbic/mesocortical dopaminergic neurons more selectively than behaviors associated with nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons. In rats, tryptamine-induced clonic seizure, a 5-HT2 receptor-mediated behavior, was also dose-dependently inhibited by NRA0045 (ED50 = 1.7 mg/kg i.p.). Norepinephrine-induced lethality is regarded as being induced through the alpha-1 adrenoceptor. NRA0045 dose-dependently antagonized norepinephrine-induced lethality in rats (ED50 = 0.2 mg/kg i.p.). Thus NRA0045 may have a unique antipsychotic activity with regard to dopamine D4 and 5-HT2A receptors and alpha-1 adrenoceptor antagonistic activities, without producing the extrapyramidal side effects.
93	NR	9193198	BACKGROUND: Based mainly on the selective antagonism of clozapine at D4 compared with D2 dopamine receptors, hopes have run high that a selective D4 dopamine receptor antagonist might improve the pharmacological treatment of patients with schizophrenia. We report, to our knowledge, the first multicenter study of the antipsychotic potential of a highly specific D4 dopamine receptor antagonist (ie, L-745,870) in patients with acute schizophrenia. METHODS: Thirty-eight acutely psychotic and neuroleptic responsive (by history) newly admitted inpatients with schizophrenia were randomized to 4 weeks of double-blind treatment (2:1) with either L-745,870 (n = 26), 15 mg/d, or placebo (n = 12) after a 3- to 5-day placebo run-in period. RESULTS: Overall, a greater percentage of patients receiving L-745,870 compared with patients receiving placebo discontinued the study for insufficient therapeutic response (32% vs 16%). At the end of 4 weeks by last observation carried forward analysis, the mean change from baseline to week 4 on the total Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale favored placebo (i.e., -8 points [-15% change from baseline] vs -1 point [-2% change from baseline] for placebo vs L-745,870, P = .09). Similar differences in favor of placebo in changes from baseline mean scores were observed for the not carried forward analysis on the total Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (P < .03), for not carried forward and last observation carried forward analyses on the sum of selected positive symptom items of the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale, and for the Clinical Global Impression analysis (P = .03, last observation carried forward). A greater percentage of patients receiving L-745,870 had scores indicative of some level of worsening (compared with baseline) on the total Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale and the Clinical Global Impressions' Severity of Illness Scale as well as positive symptoms compared with those receiving placebo. CONCLUSION: The selective D4 dopamine receptor antagonist L-745,870 was ineffective as an antipsychotic for the treatment of neuroleptic responsive inpatients with acute schizophrenia.
93	DR	9184311	The human dopamine D2 receptor gene (DRD2) has received considerable attention for the past several years as a potential candidate that may affect susceptibility to alcoholism. The association studies that compared the frequencies of alleles of DRD2 gene between alcoholics and control groups have produced equivocal results. Dopamine D3 and D4 receptor genes (DRD3 and DRD4) are in the same class as DRD2 but with different pharmacological properties. We have used relative risk and haplotype relative risk approaches to test associations between alleles of DRD3 and DRD4 genes and alcoholism. For relative risk studies 162 probands from multiple incidence alcoholic families have been compared to 89 psychiatrically normal controls. Haplotype relative risk approaches have used 29 alcoholic probands in which both parents were available for genotyping. The Bal I restriction enzyme site in DRD3 and tandem repeat (VNTR) in DRD4 genes polymorphisms were used to genotype the above samples. The results of relative risk approaches for both DRD3 and DRD4 genes were negative for comparisons of alcoholics and subtypes of alcoholics with normal controls. Haplotype relative risk approaches also were negative for both genes. These results suggest that any role played by these receptors may account for only part of the variation in susceptibility to alcoholism.
93	PR	9152990	Only in the past decade has a role of heredity in substance abuse been established as a result of extensive twin and family studies. More recently, several candidate genes have been investigated for their possible role in alcoholism and cocaine abuse. Specific genetic factors in opioid substance abuse have not been investigated in man, although animal studies suggest that quantitative trait loci (QTLs) can be identified that predispose mice both to morphine and alcohol preference. Central dopaminergic pathways figure prominently in drug-mediated reinforcement suggesting that dopamine receptors are likely candiadates for association with substance abuse in man. In addition, we recently reported an association between a human personality trait, Novelty Seeking and the long alleles (represented chiefly by the 7-repeat) of the D4 dopamine receptor (D4DR) exon III polymorphism. The personality trait of Novelty Seeking is also more pronounced in substance abusers, who score higher in this dimension than control subjects. The twin role of dopamine receptors in mediating Novelty Seeking and drugreinforcement prompted us to examine a group of Israeli heroin addicts for prevalence of the D4DR repeat polymorphism. We now show that the 7-repeat allele is significantly over-represented in the opioid-dependent cohort and confers a relative risk of 2.46. To our knowledge this is the first report of an association between a specific genetic polymorphism and opioid addiction.
93	DR	9034534	The dopaminergic system has been implicated in alcoholism but studies at the dopamine D2 receptor gene (DRD2), one of the five dopamine receptors, have not given a consistent picture of an association with alcoholism. We have now studied the dopamine D4 receptor gene (DRD4) using six polymorphisms, both separately and as haplotypes. Three groups of alcoholics from Taiwan (Atayal, Ami, and Han) diagnosed as having severe alcohol dependence using DSM-III-R criteria, together with nonalcoholics matched for gender, ethnic group, and geographic origin, were typed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and/or PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) for all six polymorphisms. Three out of six markers are polymorphic in all three Taiwanese populations. Although the prevalence rates of alcoholism are remarkably different, no highly significant association of this locus with alcoholism was observed in any of the three groups whether the analysis considered genotype distributions or allele frequencies at the three polymorphic markers considered individually and as haplotypes. Neither is there any obvious pattern in the data that covaries with or hints at a relationship with the very different prevalences of alcoholism in the groups studied. Especially because the powerful, multi-site haplotype analysis was not statistically significant in any of the population samples, we conclude that there is no association of the DRD4 locus with alcoholism in Taiwanese populations.
93	DR	9046370	Associations of polymorphic genetic markers at the tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and dopamine D4 receptor (DRD4) loci were examined in Scandinavian chronic alcoholics (n = 72) and control subjects (n = 67). Patients were divided into subgroups with regard to the presence of parental alcoholism and age of onset. Neither the TH nor the DRD4 allele distributions were significantly different when alcoholic samples were compared with control subjects. However, a tendency to high prevalence for 1 of the 5 TH alleles assayed (TH-K3) was observed in a subsample of 44 alcoholics characterized by late onset when compared with control subjects (27.3% vs. 10.6%, p = 0.041). Results suggest that no major influence on alcoholism is exerted through genes associated with the DRD4 or TH allelic markers examined.
93	NR	9003072	The catecholamines dopamine (DA), epinephrine (EP), and norepinephrine (NE) play important roles in learning and memory, emotional states, and control of voluntary movement, as well as cardiovascular and kidney function. They activate distinct but overlapping neuronal pathways through five distinct DA receptors (D1R-D5R) and at least 10 different adrenergic receptors (alpha 1a/b/c, alpha 2a/b/c-1/c-2, and beta 1/beta 2/beta 3). The D4R, which is localized to mesolimbic areas of the brain implicated in affective and emotional behavior, has a deduced amino acid sequence with homology to both adrenergic and dopaminergic receptor subtypes. We report here that DA, EP, and NE all show binding in the nanomolar range to three isoforms of the recombinant human D4R (hD4R): D4.2, D4.4, and D4.7. Submicromolar concentrations of DA, EP, and NE were sufficient to activate hD4R isoforms in two different functional assays: agonist-induced guanosine 5'-O-(3-[35S]thiotriphosphate) binding and modulation of adenylyl cyclase activity. DA was approximately fivefold more potent than EP and NE at the D4R, whereas activation of the human D2R required at least 100-fold higher catecholamine concentrations. Functional activation of the D4R by multiple neurotransmitters may provide a novel mechanism for integration of catecholamine signaling in the brain and periphery.
93	NR	9042615	The activity of monoamine neurotransmitters was examined at dopamine D4 receptors. In competition binding with [3H]spiperone, noradrenaline and adrenaline exhibited a high affinity binding component (KH = 12.1 nM and 5.0 nM, respectively), similar to that of dopamine (KH = 2.6 nM), whereas serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) and histamine had low affinity (Ki > 1000 nM). Noradrenaline and adrenaline acted as agonists at dopamine D4 receptors, stimulating receptor-mediated [35S]guanylyl-gamma-thiotriphosphate ([35S]GTP gamma S) binding (EC50 = 7.8 and 5.8 microM, respectively, versus 0.1 microM for dopamine). The dopamine D4 receptor-selective ligand, 3-(4-[4-chlorophenyl]piperazin-1-yl)methyl-1H-pyrrolo[2,3b]-pyridi ne (L 745,870) and the dopaminergic antagonists, spiperone, haloperidol and clozapine, inhibited noradrenaline-stimulated [35S]GTP gamma S binding whereas alpha 1-, alpha 2- and beta-adrenoceptor antagonists did not. These results indicate that dopamine D4 receptors are activated by noradrenaline and adrenaline, although at 50-100-fold higher concentrations than dopamine.
93	NR	8915563	Monoamine metabolite (MM) levels in lumbar cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) are extensively used as indirect estimates of monoamine turnover in the brain. In this study we investigated genotypes for DNA polymorphisms in the D2 (DRD2), D3 (DRD3), and D4 (DRD4) dopamine receptor and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) genes and their relationships to CSF MM in healthy volunteers (n = 66). Concentrations of homovanillic acid (HVA), 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol (MHPG), and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) were corrected for back length, a confounding variable. Corrected MM levels were not related to age, gender, height, weight heredity, season or atmospheric pressure at sampling. Individuals with specific DRD2 and TH allele and genotype configurations significantly differed in HVA and MHPG concentrations. DRD3 homo- and heterozygotic genotypes had significantly different CSF 5-HIAA levels. DRD4 genotypes were not related to MM concentrations. The results suggest that specific DRD2, DRD3, and TH genotypes participate in the regulation of monoamine turnover in the central nervous system. Accordingly monoamine receptors and synthesizing enzyme genotypes appear to be variance factors influencing MM concentrations in CSF. The relationships found in this study support MM concentrations as markers for monoamine transmission in the human brain.
93	DR	9154232	Ebstein and colleagues have recently reported a significant association between the 7-repeat allele of the dopamine D4 receptor (D4DR) 16 amino acid repeat polymorphism and the personality trait of Novelty Seeking (NS) in 124 Israeli subjects. This study, and another study conducted in the US (although with a different personality measure) that observed a similar association, have generated wide interest in the identification of the genes involved in personality variation. We have determined D4DR genotypes in two groups of Finnish subjects; 193 psychiatrically screened normal controls and 138 alcoholic offenders and assessed NS with the Tridimensional Personality Questionnaire (TPQ). In normals, we find no significant association between NS and the 7-repeat allele despite similar allele frequencies and the use of the same personality measure as Ebstein et al. The group of alcoholic offenders have significantly higher NS than normals, however we fail to replicate the previous association in this group and, in fact, find a significant association in the opposite direction as previously observed. These data suggest that D4DR may require re-evaluation as a candidate gene for personality variation.
93	DR	8929946	A point mutation in the aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 gene (ALDH2(2) allele) is considered to be a genetic deterrent for alcoholism; however, 80 of 655 Japanese alcoholics had the mutant allele. Genotype factors that might increase susceptibility by overriding the deterrent showed a higher frequency of a five repeat allele of the dopamine D4 receptor 48 bp repeat polymorphism in alcoholics with ALDH2(2) than in 100 other alcoholics and 144 controls. Alcoholics with the five repeat allele also abused other drugs more often. These data suggest the involvement of the dopamine system in the development of alcoholism and other addictive behaviour.
93	DR	7573171	The DRD4 dopamine receptor is thus far unique among neurotransmitter receptors in having a highly polymorphic gene structure that has been reported to produce altered receptor functioning. These allelic variations are caused by a 48-bp segment in exon III of the coding region which may be repeated from 2-10 times. Varying the numbers of repeated segments changes the length, structure, and, possibly, the functional efficiency of the receptor, which makes this gene an intriguing candidate for variations in dopamine-related behaviors, such as alcoholism and drug abuse. Thus far, these DRD4 alleles have been investigated for association with schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, Parkinson's disease, and chronic alcoholism, and all have been largely negative for a direct association. We evaluated the DRD4 genotype in 226 Finish adult males, 113 of whom were alcoholics, many of the early onset type with features of impulsivity and antisocial traits. Genotype frequencies were compared to 113 Finnish controls who were free of alcohol abuse, substance abuse, and major mental illness. In 70 alcoholics and 20 controls, we measured CSF homovanillic acid (HVA), the major metabolite of dopamine, and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA). No association was found between a particular DRD4 dopamine receptor allele and alcoholism. CSF concentrations of the monoamine metabolites showed no significant difference among the DRD4 genotypes. This study of the DRD4 dopamine receptor in alcoholics is the first to be conducted in a clinically and ethnically homogeneous population and to relate the DRD4 genotype to CSF monoamine concentrations. The results indicate that there is no association of the DRD4 receptor with alcoholism.
93	NR	7609873	The atypical antipsychotic clozapine produces distinctly different regional patterns of c-fos expression in rat forebrain than does the prototypical neuroleptic haloperidol. While haloperidol-induced c-fos expression appears to be mediated by its D2 dopamine receptor antagonist properties, the mechanisms by which clozapine increases c-fos expression remain uncertain. Using a combination of brain lesion, pharmacological and immunohistochemical techniques, the present study sought to determine the receptor mechanisms by which clozapine increases the number of Fos-like immunoreactive neurons in various regions of the forebrain. To test whether serotonergic and/or noradrenergic systems are involved in clozapine-induced c-fos expression, rats received either 5,7-dihydroxytryptamine lesions of the medial forebrain bundle or 6-hydroxydopamine lesions of the dorsal noradrenergic bundle two weeks prior to clozapine (20 mg/kg) injections. Neither type of lesion affected clozapine-induced c-fos expression in the rat forebrain, suggesting that neither serotonergic nor noradrenergic mechanisms are involved in this action of clozapine. In another experiment, the 5-hydroxytryptamine2 receptor antagonist ritanserin (5 mg/kg), either alone or in combination with haloperidol (1 mg/kg), failed to mimic the pattern of c-fos expression produced by clozapine. This suggests that clozapine's antagonist actions at 5-hydroxytryptamine2 receptors cannot explain the unique pattern of regional c-fos expression produced by this compound. To determine whether the blockade of subtypes of the D2 dopamine receptor family may contribute to clozapine's effects, the dopamine receptor agonists quinpirole and 7-hydroxy-N,N-di-n-propyl-2-aminotetralin (7-OH-DPAT) were injected 15 min prior to clozapine. Quinpirole produced a small but significant decrease in clozapine-induced c-fos expression in the medial prefrontal cortex, had larger effects in the lateral septum, and blocked clozapine's actions in the nucleus accumbens and major island of Calleja. Pretreatment with 7-OH-DPAT attenuated clozapine-induced c-fos expression in the nucleus accumbens and lateral septum, completely blocked the expression in the major island of Calleja, but was without effect in the medial prefrontal cortex. Given the different affinities of quinpirole and 7-OH-DPAT for D2, D3 and D4 receptors, these data suggest that clozapine-induced increases in c-fos expression in the nucleus accumbens, major island of Cajella and lateral septal nucleus are due to antagonist actions of this antipsychotic at D3 dopamine receptors. They also indicate that while antagonist actions at D4 receptors may contribute, the primary mechanisms by which clozapine increases c-fos expression in the medial prefrontal cortex remain to be determined.
93	NR	8612062	Individual alleles identified by candidate gene analysis have been shown to profoundly influence certain complex behavioral syndromes including vulnerability to alcoholism. The alcohol and aldehyde dehydrogenase polymorphisms, ADH2(2) and ALDH2(2), respectively, are associated with lower vulnerability to alcoholism both in the Orient and also in North America among populations of Taiwanese and Koreans who have immigrated there. Protein structural variants have recently been identified for a series of genes involved in dopamine and serotonin function. Three dopamine receptors exhibit such structural variants, and these include the DRD2 dopamine receptor, which has three relatively rare amino acid substitutions. Structural polymorphisms were detected in five serotonin receptors (5HT1A, 5HT1Db, 5HT2A, 5HT2C, and 5HT7). Association studies between neurotransmitter gene variants and alcoholism are at an earlier stage than with ADH2(2)/ALDH2(2), but results are thus far negative (dopamine DRD4 receptor), equivocal (dopamine DRD2 receptor), or preliminary (tryptophan hydroxylase, 5HT2C and 5HT1Db).
93	NR	8301592	In order to study the properties of the D2-like dopamine receptors, D2, D3 and D4 clones were transfected into mouse Ltk- fibroblasts, CCL1.3, and a neuronal mesencephalic cell line, MN9D. Most of the derived antagonist and agonist inhibition constants were the same for a given receptor in either cell line as determined by saturation and competition binding experiments. The rank order potencies for antagonists are: eticlopride, D2 > D3 > D4; YM-09151-2, D2 = D4 > D3; spiperone, D2 = D3 > D4; (+)-butaclamol, D2 > D3 > D4; clozapine, D4 > D2 > D3; and for agonists, quinpirole, D3 = D4 > D2; 7-hydroxy-2-(di-n-propyl)-aminotetralin, D3 > D2 = D4. Functionally, D2 stimulation increases inositol phosphate levels in CCL1.3 cells but not in MN9D, whereas D2 activation inhibits forskolin-stimulated cyclic AMP levels in both cell lines. D4 stimulation has no effect on inositol phosphate metabolism in either cell type, but inhibits adenylate cyclase in MN9D cells. Both the D2 and D4 mediated decreases in cyclic AMP can be blocked by preincubation with pertussis toxin. D3 does not couple to these pathways in either cell line. Reverse transcription/polymerase chain reaction techniques were used to determine the availability of cellular signalling systems. Both CCL1.3 and MN9D cells have high levels of G alpha i2 expression, whereas neither cell expresses G alpha i1 or G alpha i3. These data imply that the D2 receptor couples to the G alpha i2 subtype in both cell lines, whereas D4 does not.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
93	NR	7801792	The vertebrate retina rhythmically synthesizes melatonin, a hormone involved in the regulation of several intraocular processes cued by environmental lighting conditions. The rhythm of retinal melatonin production, with maximal synthesis at night in darkness, is driven by the photoperiodic environment to which animals are exposed, and is generated by an endogenous circadian clock(s). This article reviews data on the role of dopamine, an established retinal neurotransmitter and paracrine factor, as a mediator of acute suppressive and entrainment action of light on the melatonin generating system in the retina. Special emphasis is given to the characterization of dopamine receptor types involved in the control of retinal melatonin formation.
94	DR	14728000	Treatment with hydroxymethylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors has been accompanied by a reduced risk of cardiovascular events. Rapid onset of clinical benefit and weak correlations between plasma low density lipoprotein-cholesterol levels and coronary lumen change or cardiovascular events indicates that nonlipid mechanisms are involved in this beneficial effects with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors. Furthermore, more rapid onset of clinical benefit with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors in patients with acute coronary syndromes or acute myocardial infarction than in those with stable coronary heart disease suggest that HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors facilitate repair of ruptured or ulcerated atherosclerotic plaque, facilitate plaque stabilization and/or reduce thrombus formation on ruptured plaques. Treatment with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors improved endothelial dysfunction in patients with hypercholesterolemia and this improvement in endothelial function was not correlated with reduction in total serum cholesterol levels. Similarly, reduction in endothelial pre-proendothelin mRNA expression and endothelin synthesis and blood pressure lowering with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors occurred independent of lipid-lowering. Finally, HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors increased endothelial nitric oxide levels i.e. upregulated endothelial nitric oxide synthetase expression via post-transcriptional mechanisms and prevented its down-regulation by oxidized LDL-C. HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors have been shown to modulate the immune response by inhibiting activation of immune-competent cells such as macrophages, and antigen presentation to macrophages by T cells. Treatment with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors can reduce expression, production and circulating levels of chemokines (monocyte chemoattractant protein-1) and proinflammatory cytokines [tumor necrosis factoralpha, interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-1beta]. HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors reduced inflammation in human atheroma: significantly fewer macrophages and T cells, less oxidized LDL-C and higher collagen content. In addition, treatment with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor led to decreased cell death within the atheroma. Treatment with these agents also reduced expression of inducible cellular adhesion molecules, decreased secretion of metalloproteinases by macrophages, reduced vascular smooth muscle cell apoptosis. Lastly, HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors appear to have important effects on the thrombogenesis: reduced expression of tissue factor production and activity; increased production of tissue factor package inhibitor; decreased platelet thrombus formation and improved fibrinolysis as a result of lowered plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 levels. As the pluripotential cardioprotective mechanisms of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors are further elucidated, it is envisaged that treatment with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors will be initiated earlier and more frequently in patients with hypercholesterolemia.
94	PR	14630701	E-selectin mediated cell-cell adhesion plays an important role in inflammatory processes and extravasation of tumor cells. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) induces E-selectin gene and protein expression in primary human endothelial cells (HUVEC) and in an endothelial cell line (EA.hy-926). As shown by ELISA and FACS analyses, HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (e.g., lovastatin) impair the TNF-alpha stimulated increase in E-selectin protein expression. Similar results were obtained for E-selectin mRNA expression and promoter activity, indicating that the effect of lovastatin is based on inhibition of gene expression. The effective inhibitory concentration of lovastatin was in a physiologically relevant range (IC50<0.1 microM). Lovastatin-mediated block of TNF-alpha induced E-selectin expression is due to inhibition of protein geranylgeranylation rather than farnesylation. Down-regulation of Rho signaling by coexpression of dominant-negative Rho mutants (i.e RhoA, RhoB and Rac) impaired TNF-alpha driven E-selectin gene expression, indicating Rho signaling to be essential for transcriptional activation of the E-selectin gene. Inhibition of E-selectin expression by lovastatin gives rise to a significant reduction in TNF-alpha stimulated adhesion of colon carcinoma cells to HUVEC. Furthermore, low concentration of lovastatin (i.e., < or =1 microM) attenuated TNF-alpha induced tumor cell invasion in vitro. The data support the view that statins might be clinically useful in protection against E-selectin mediated metastasis.
94	NR	14533871	Cholesterol synthesis was demonstrated to be mandatory for cellular growth and serves to supply one of the necessary building blocks for new membranes demanded by dividing cells during growth. The mevalonate pathway, which is regulated through a finely tuned mechanism, is responsible mainly for cholesterol enrichment to cells. Among the various steps, the production of mevalonate from 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) is the most critically regulated step catalyzed by HMG-CoA reductase. The ability of sterols to regulate both the transcriptional rates of the reductase gene and the degradative machinery for the reductase protein provides a multilevel system for controlling the expression of this enzyme. Much convincing evidence indicates that cells manifest a higher flux through the mevalonate pathway when proliferating than when they are in the cell cycle arrest condition; furthermore, tumors undergo deregulated cholesterogenesis mainly at the critical rate-controlling juncture (i.e., the reaction catalyzed by HMG-CoA reductase). The mevalonate component of the cholesterol biosynthesis plays a key role in controlling cell proliferation by generating prenyl intermediates, particularly farnesyl and geranyl-geranyl moieties. These isoprenoids covalently modify and thus modulate the biological activity of signal transducing proteins, such as that of the Ras superfamily. The prenylated Ras-mediated signal transduction pathway provides much of the molecular information needed to trigger cell proliferation. Therefore, depletion of mevalonate can block both the processing and the transforming activities of Ras, indicating that drugs such as lovastatin and compactin, which had previously been exploited for lowering cholesterol levels, may be useful chemotherapeutic agents for treating tumors harboring oncogenic Ras mutation. In addition, Ras prenylation, which provides much of the molecular information needed to trigger cell proliferation, represents an inviting target for the design of chemotherapeutic drugs that would interrupt such signaling events and arrest tumor cell proliferation.
94	PR	14522872	In Xenopus laevis, beta-catenin-mediated dorsal axis formation can be suppressed by overexpression of the HMG-box transcription factor XSOX3. Mutational analysis indicates that this effect is due not to the binding of XSOX3 to beta-catenin nor to its competition with beta-catenin-regulated TCF-type transcription factors for specific DNA binding sites, but rather to SOX3 binding to sites within the promoter of the early VegT- and beta-catenin-regulated dorsal-mesoderm-inducing gene Xnr5. Although B1-type SOX proteins, such as XSOX3, are commonly thought to act as transcriptional activators, XSOX3 acts as a transcriptional repressor of Xnr5 in both the intact embryo and animal caps injected with VegT RNA. Expression of a chimeric polypeptide composed of XSOX3 and a VP16 transcriptional activation domain or morpholino-induced decrease in endogenous XSOX3 polypeptide levels lead to an increase in Xnr5 expression, as does injection of an anti-XSOX3 antibody that inhibits XSOX3 DNA binding. These observations indicate that maternal XSOX3 acts in a novel manner to restrict Xnr5 expression to the vegetal hemisphere.
94	PR	12909353	A pheromone-induced mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway controls mating in fungi by regulating gene transcription. In the opportunistic fungus Pneumocystis carinii, we have identified a protein containing a high-mobility group (HMG) motif which is homologous to the transcriptional activators STE11 of Schizosaccharomyces pombe and STE12 of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. In fungi, this transcriptional activator functions in sexual development, filamentous growth, and pathogenicity. The fungal pheromone-activated MAPK phosphorylates the transcriptional activator to allow binding to pheromone-response elements in the promoter regions of certain genes. We have previously identified a P. carinii MAPK, PCM, which has significant homology to fungal MAPKs involved in mating. As an initial step in understanding the downstream molecules which interact with the PCM kinase, we have cloned a STE11 homologue in P. carinii. PCSTE11 has an open-reading frame of 1.5 kb which encodes a protein of 501 amino acids with a molecular weight of 56 kDa. Greatest homology was to S. pombe STE11 (52%). We have expressed a His-tag fusion of PCSTE11 and purified the protein with nickel affinity resin. PCM phosphorylates the purified protein indicating that PCSTE11 is associated with the MAPK cascade in P. carinii.
94	DR	12868057	Increased levels of HMG-CoA reductase induce cell type- and isozyme-specific proliferation of the endoplasmic reticulum. In yeast, the ER proliferations induced by Hmg1p consist of nuclear-associated stacks of smooth ER membranes known as karmellae. To identify genes required for karmellae assembly, we compared the composition of populations of homozygous diploid S. cerevisiae deletion mutants following 20 generations of growth with and without karmellae. Using an initial population of 1,557 deletion mutants, 120 potential mutants were identified as a result of three independent experiments. Each experiment produced a largely non-overlapping set of potential mutants, suggesting that differences in specific growth conditions could be used to maximize the comprehensiveness of similar parallel analysis screens. Only two genes, UBC7 and YAL011W, were identified in all three experiments. Subsequent analysis of individual mutant strains confirmed that each experiment was identifying valid mutations, based on the mutant's sensitivity to elevated HMG-CoA reductase and inability to assemble normal karmellae. The largest class of HMG-CoA reductase-sensitive mutations was a subset of genes that are involved in chromatin structure and transcriptional regulation, suggesting that karmellae assembly requires changes in transcription or that the presence of karmellae may interfere with normal transcriptional regulation. Copyright 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
94	DR	12824699	The 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors, statins, are potent inhibitors of cholesterol synthesis and have wide therapeutic use in cardiovascular diseases. Recent evidence, however, suggests that the beneficial effects of statins may extend beyond their action on serum cholesterol levels. In this study, we investigated the effects of lovastatin, pravastatin, atorvastatin and fluvastatin on macrophage formation of nitric oxide (NO) in murine RAW 264.7 cells. Stimulation of macrophages with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) resulted in inducible NO synthase (iNOS) expression, which was accompanied by a large amount of NO formation. At concentrations of 0.1-30 microM, statins can inhibit stimuli-induced NO formation and iNOS induction to different extents. This inhibition occurs at the transcriptional level, and displays potency in the order of lovastatin > atorvastatin > fluvastatin >> pravastatin. We found that LPS-induced I kappa B kinase and nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappa B) activation, as well as IFN-gamma-induced signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) phosphorylation, were reduced by lovastatin. Moreover, inhibition by lovastatin of NO production and kappa B activation was reversed by mevalonate, geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate and farnesyl pyrophosphate. All these results suggest that inhibition of iNOS gene expression by statins can be attributed to interference with protein isoprenylation, which mediates both NF-kappa B and STAT1 activation in the upstream signaling pathways for iNOS gene transcription. Copyright 2003 National Science Council, ROC and S. Karger AG, Basel
94	PR	12711682	Members of the Tcf/Lef family of the HMG box transcription factors are nuclear effectors of the Wnt signal transduction pathway. Upon Wnt signaling, TCF/LEF proteins interact with beta-catenin and activate transcription of target genes, while, in the absence of the Wnt signal, TCFs function as transcriptional repressors. All vertebrate Tcf/Lef transcription factors associate with TLE/Groucho-related co-repressors, and here we provide evidence for an interaction between the C-terminus of the TCF-4 HMG box protein and the C-terminal binding protein 1 (CtBP1) transcriptional co-repressor. Using Wnt-1-stimulated human embryonic kidney 293 cells, we show that CtBP1 represses the transcriptional activity of a Tcf/beta-catenin-dependent synthetic promoter and, furthermore, decreases the expression of the endogenous Wnt target, Axin2/Conductin. The CtBP1-mediated repression was alleviated by trichostatin A treatment, indicating that the CtBP inhibitory mechanism is dependent on the activity of histone deacetylases.
94	NR	12710953	The Pax6 gene plays crucial roles in eye development and encodes a transcription factor containing both a paired domain and a homeodomain. During embryogenesis, Pax6 is expressed in restricted tissues under the direction of distinct cis-regulatory regions. The head surface ectoderm-specific enhancer of mouse Pax6 directs reporter expression in the derivatives of the ectoderm in the eye, such as lens and cornea, but the molecular mechanism of its control remains largely unknown. We identified a Pax6 protein-responsive element termed LE9 (52 bp in length) within the head surface ectoderm-specific enhancer. LE9, a sequence well conserved across vertebrates, acted as a highly effective enhancer in reporter analyses. Pax6 protein formed in vitro a complex with the distal half of LE9 in a manner dependent on the paired domain. The proximal half of the LE9 sequence contains three plausible sites of HMG domain recognition, and HMG domain-containing transcription factors Sox2 and Sox3 activated LE9 synergistically with Pax6. A scanning mutagenesis experiment indicated that the central site is most important among the three presumptive HMG domain recognition sites. Furthermore, Pax6 and Sox2 proteins formed a complex when they were expressed together. Based on these findings, we propose a model in which Pax6 protein directly and positively regulates its own gene expression, and Sox2 and Sox3 proteins interact with Pax6 protein, resulting in modification of the transcriptional activation by Pax6 protein.
94	PR	12677004	Chondrogenesis leads to the formation of mature cartilage and generates initial skeletal elements that serve as templates for endochondral bone formation. Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are involved in several developmental and organogenetic processes and have been identified as key regulators in chondrogenesis. In the present study we sought to determine the transcriptional mechanisms contributing to the induction of chondrogenic markers by BMP-2. Time-course studies with BMP-2-stimulated C3H10T1/2 cells showed a dose-dependent appearance of Alcian-blue-positive material and up-regulated expression of type-II collagen mRNA. This last effect required new protein synthesis because addition of cycloheximide completely blocked the induction of type-II collagen mRNA. A region encompassing the chondrocyte-specific enhancer, localized in intron I of type-II collagen alpha1 chain (Col2a1) gene, is sufficient to confer BMP-2-dependent transcriptional induction of type-II collagen gene expression. Analysis of the expression levels of chondrogenic Sry-type high-mobility group (HMG) box proteins (SOX) transcription factors demonstrated a time-dependent induction of Sox6 expression by BMP-2 that correlated with the appearance of BMP-2- induced protein complexes bound to the chondrocyte-specific enhancer. Preincubation of nuclear extracts with SOX6 and SOX9 antibodies markedly reduced the intensity of these bands. Forced expression of SOX6 mimicked the BMP-2 effect, whereas coexpression of SOX9 promoted a synergistic interaction between both factors in transcription from the chondrocyte-specific enhancer. Moreover, overexpression of a SOX6 mutated form, devoid of its high-mobility group domain, was sufficient to prevent transcriptional induction of the chondrocyte-specific enhancer by BMP-2. Taken together, these results indicate that SOX6 is an important downstream mediator of BMP-2 signaling in chondrogenesis.
94	DR	12626711	The expression of mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase in the colon has been correlated with the levels of butyrate present in this tissue. We report here that the effect of butyrate on mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase gene expression is exerted in vivo at the transcriptional level, and that trichostatin A (TSA), a specific histone deacetylase inhibitor, also induces transcriptional activity and mRNA expression of the gene in human cell lines derived from colon carcinoma. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, we show that histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) is associated with the endogenous mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase promoter and that TSA induction correlates with hyperacetylation of H4 histone associated with the 5' flanking region of the gene. Overexpression of HDAC1 activity leads consistently to mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase promoter hypoacetylation and reduces its transcriptional activity. The effect of butyrate and TSA maps to a single Sp1 site present in the proximal promoter of the gene, which is able to bind Sp1 and Sp3 proteins. Interestingly, the binding affinity of Sp1 and Sp3 proteins to the Sp1 site correlates with the TSA responsiveness of the promoter. Using a one-hybrid system (GAL4-Sp1 and GAL4-Sp3), we show that both proteins can mediate responsiveness to TSA in CaCo-2 cells employing distinct mechanisms.
94	PR	12591091	3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors have been reported to inhibit vascular smooth muscle cell growth, a key event in the pathogenesis of proliferative vascular diseases. The mechanism by which HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors exert their antiproliferative activity is not fully understood, especially their effect on DNA replication. We therefore investigated the effects of atorvastatin on minichromosome maintenance (MCM) protein 6 and 7 expression in vascular smooth muscle cells, two proteins essential for initiation of DNA replication. Stimulation of quiescent rat aortic vascular smooth muscle cells with fetal bovine serum induced MCM6 and MCM7 protein and mRNA expression, which was potently attenuated by atorvastatin in a dose-dependent fashion. Mevalonate completely abrogated the inhibitory effect on serum-induced MCM6 and MCM7 expression, demonstrating that biosynthesis of isoprenoids was likely the specific pathway blocked by atorvastatin. Transient transfection experiments revealed that atorvastatin inhibited MCM6 and MCM7 promoter activity, implicating a transcriptional mechanism. The MCM6 and MCM7 promoters contain several E2F sites critical for their transcriptional activation. Activity of a luciferase reporter plasmid containing four E2F elements was also strongly inhibited by atorvastatin. The inhibitory effect of atorvastatin on MCM6 and MCM7 was reversed by adenoviral-mediated overexpression of E2F, indicating that their downregulation by atorvastatin involves an E2F-dependent mechanism. These findings demonstrate that MCM proteins play an essential role during the proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells and may provide a novel therapeutic target for proliferative vascular diseases. Inhibition of MCM6 and MCM7 expression by blocking E2F function may contribute importantly to the inhibition of vascular smooth muscle cell DNA synthesis by atorvastatin.
94	PR	12560602	The Sox family is a large group of transcription factors that are characterized by the presence of a DNA-binding HMG domain. We isolated HrSoxB1, an ascidian homolog of the Sox gene that belongs to the B1 subclass of the Sox family, from Halocynthia roretzi. Expression was initiated as early as the 8-cell stage. During cleavage stages, HrSoxB1 was expressed in three quarters of embryonic blastomeres but not in posterior-vegetal (B-line) blastomeres. Misexpression of mRNAs of HrPEM but not of macho-1, whose maternal mRNAs are localized to the posterior-vegetal cytoplasm of eggs and early embryos, repressed the anterior-vegetal expression of HrSoxB1. This result suggests that the zygotic expression of HrSoxB1 is controlled by the localized maternal mRNA. When HrSoxB1 was overexpressed in early embryos, ectopic expression of HrBra, a gene for a transcription factor expressed in notochord blastomeres, occurred in the most posterior blastomeres (B7.5), although these blastomeres did not eventually differentiate into notochord but developed into muscle, as they do in normal embryogenesis. In later embryogenesis, HrSoxB1 was specifically expressed in neural plate cells. However, overexpression of HrSoxB1 did not affect the expression of a neural plate marker gene, HrETR-1.
94	NR	12538520	Neural crest patterning constitutes an important element in the control of the morphogenesis of craniofacial structures. Krox20, a transcription factor gene that plays a critical role in the development of the segmented hindbrain, is expressed in rhombomeres (r) 3 and 5 and in a stream of neural crest cells migrating from r5 toward the third branchial arch. We have investigated the basis of the specific neural crest expression of Krox20 and identified a cis-acting enhancer element (NCE) located 26 kb upstream of the gene that is conserved between mouse, man and chick and can recapitulate the Krox20 neural crest pattern in transgenic mice. Functional dissection of the enhancer revealed the presence of two conserved Krox20 binding sites mediating direct Krox20 autoregulation in the neural crest. In addition, the enhancer included another essential element containing conserved binding sites for high mobility group (HMG) box proteins and which responded to factors expressed throughout the neural crest. Consistent with this the NCE was strongly activated in vitro by Sox10, a crest-specific HMG box protein, in synergism with Krox20, and the inactivation of Sox10 prevented the maintenance of Krox20 expression in the migrating neural crest. These results suggest that the dependency of the enhancer on both crest- (Sox10) and r5- (Krox20) specific factors limits its activity to the r5-derived neural crest. This organisation also suggests a mechanism for the transfer and maintenance of rhombomere-specific gene expression from the hindbrain neuroepithelium to the emerging neural crest and may be of more general significance for neural crest patterning.
94	PR	12524225	OBJECTIVE: Pleiotropic atheroprotective effects of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors may be mediated on the level of vascular gene transcription. The aim of this study was to characterize the effects of statins on the activation of transcription factors known to regulate inflammation and cell proliferation/differentiation. METHODS AND RESULTS: Simvastatin, atorvastatin, and lovastatin (0.1 to 10 micro mol/L) inhibited the binding of nuclear proteins to both the nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappaB) and activator protein-1 (AP-1) DNA consensus oligonucleotides in human endothelial and vascular smooth muscle cells as assessed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). The inhibitory effects of statins on NF-kappaB or AP-1-dependent transcriptional activity were examined by transient transfection studies. HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors upregulated IkappaB-alpha protein levels in endothelial cells and decreased c-Jun mRNA expression in smooth muscle cells as analyzed by Western and Northern blotting, respectively. Furthermore, statins inhibited DNA binding of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha. Downstream effects of statins included inhibition of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 and vascular endothelial growth factor-A mRNA levels in endothelial cells. CONCLUSIONS: HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors downregulate the activation of transcription factors NF-kappaB, AP-1, and hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha. These findings support the concept that statins have antiinflammatory and antiproliferative effects that are relevant in the treatment of atherosclerotic diseases.
94	PR	12446692	We have identified transcription factors that bind to specific sequences in 5'-distal promoter regulatory sequences of the mouse mu opioid receptor (mor) promoter using the yeast one-hybrid system. The sequence between -746 and -707 in mor distal promoter was used as the bait because it acts as a functional promoter element and binds several DNA-binding proteins. From an adult mouse brain cDNA library, five cDNA clones encoding three Sox gene family (Sry like high mobility group (HMG) box gene) transcriptional factors, mSOX18, mSOX21, and mSOX6, were isolated. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays confirmed the presence of a binding site for SOX proteins in the -731/-725 region. Additionally, we have also established that the flanking regions outside the core Sox-binding site play an essential role in high affinity binding. DNase I footprint analysis indicates that proteins from mouse brain interact with the Sox-binding site within the mor distal promoter. Finally, we demonstrated that overexpression of mSOX18 and/or mSOX21 was able to up-regulate mouse mor distal promoter activity in mor-expressing neuronal cells (NMB). These data indicate that SOX proteins might contribute to the transcriptional activity of the mor gene and suggest that mu opioid receptor could mediate some of the developmental processes in which SOX proteins are included.
94	NR	12419552	A number of vascular diseases are associated with abnormal expression of genes that contribute to their pathophysiological and clinical manifestations, but at the same time offer potential therapeutic targets. One of the promising therapeutic approaches targets the pathophysiological pathways leading to aberrant gene activation, namely transcriptional activity and its molecular modulators (agonists, antagonists, coregulators, and nuclear receptors). The transcription factors can be divided into four classes (I-IV) classified by structural elements, like basic leucine zipper (bZIP) or basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH), which mediate their DNA binding activity but also determine the classes of drugs that can affect their activity. For example, statins modulate activation of the class-I transcription factor sterol responsive element-binding protein (SREBP), whose target genes including hydroxyl-methyl-glutaryl acetyl Coenzyme-A (HMG-CoA) reductase, HMG-CoA synthase, and the low-density lipoprotein receptor, all of which are involved in cholesterol and fatty acid metabolism. Similarly, insulin-like drugs target the nuclear receptor peroxisome-proliferator-activator-receptor (PPAR)-gamma (class-II), several anti-inflammatory drugs inhibit activation of nuclear factor kappa B (NFkappaB) (class-IV), while others (e.g. flavopiridol, rapamycin, and paclitaxel) target regulation of cell-cycle proteins. Increased understanding of the genetic and molecular basis of disease (e.g. transcriptional activity and its coregulation) will potentially enhance future diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of vascular diseases.
94	NR	12221001	Detailed study of the ectoderm and mesoderm has led to increasingly refined understanding of molecular mechanisms that operate early in development to generate cellular diversity. More recently, a number of powerful studies have begun to characterize the molecular determinants of the endoderm, a germ layer previously neglected in developmental biology. Work in diverse model systems has converged on an integrated transcriptional and signaling pathway that serves to establish the vertebrate endoderm. A T-box transcription factor identified in Xenopus embryos, VegT, appears to function near the top of an endoderm-specifying transcriptional hierarchy. VegT activates and reinforces Nodal-related TGFbeta signaling and also induces expression of essential downstream transcriptional regulators, Mix-like paired-homeodomain and GATA factors. These proteins cooperate to regulate expression of a relay of HMG-box Sox-family transcription factors culminating with Sox 17, which may be an obligate mediator of vertebrate endoderm development. This review synthesizes findings in three vertebrate model organisms and discusses these genetic interactions in the context of the progressive acquisition of endodermal identity early in vertebrate development.
94	PR	12144930	3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors (statins) are drugs very effective to decrease low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol. In addition, a number of studies suggest that statins have other beneficial clinical effects beyond cholesterol lowering. We recently reported that statins decrease nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) binding activity in monocytes and vascular smooth muscle cells. We now explored the effect of two different statins, simvastatin and atorvastatin, in the activation of the octamer transcription factor Oct-1 on the monocytic cell line THP-1. Oct-1 is a nuclear factor that represses the transcription of proinflammatory genes such as interleukin-8, CD11c/CD18, vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) and platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1). Low concentrations of both statins increased Oct-1 DNA binding activity (electrophoretic mobility shift assay) that was resolved into two specific bands. The upper one was supershifted by preincubation of nuclear extracts with anti-Oct-1 antibody. The lower one was supershifted by preincubation of nuclear extracts with an anti-Oct-2 antibody, also partially competed with 100 mol/l excess of cold activator protein-1 (AP-1) and attenuated by anti-c-Jun antibody. Both statins increased Oct-1 and Oct-2 nuclear protein levels (Western blot). In contrast, neither had any effect on PMA-differentiated cells, suggesting a distinct sensitivity between circulating monocytes and resident tissular macrophages. In addition, statins did not increase Oct-lipoprotein lipase binding activity that contains an Oct-1 binding element. The mRNA expression of interleukin-8, a chemokine containing Oct sites in its promoter, was diminished by statin pretreatment. Our results indicate that simvastatin and atorvastatin increase the activity of the transcriptional repressor Oct-1 in mononuclear cells, and could thus contribute to decrease the activation of these cells. These data suggest a possible novel mechanism supporting a certain anti-inflammatory effect of these two 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase inhibitors. Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science B.V.
94	DR	12142284	The mammalian cell continuously adjusts its sterol content by regulating levels of key sterol synthetic enzymes and levels of LDL receptors that mediate uptake of cholesterol-laden particles. Control is brought about by sterol-regulated transcription of relevant genes and by regulated degradation of the committed step enzyme HMG-CoA reductase (HMGR). Current work has revealed that proteolysis is at the heart of each of these mechanistically distinct axes. Transcriptional control is effected by regulated cleavage of the membrane-bound transcription factor sterol regulatory element binding protein (SREBP), and HMGR degradation is brought about by ubiquitin-mediated degradation. In each case, ongoing cell biological processes are being harnessed to bring about regulation. The secretory pathway plays a central role in allowing sterol-mediated control of transcription. The constitutively active endoplasmic reticulum (ER) quality control apparatus is employed to bring about regulated destruction of HMGR. This review describes the methods and results of various studies to understand the mechanisms and molecules involved in these distinct but interrelated aspects of sterol regulation and the intriguing similarities that appear to exist at the levels of protein sequence and cell biology.
94	NR	12142026	POP-1, a Tcf/Lef factor, functions throughout Caenorhabditis elegans development as a Wnt-dependent reiterative switch to generate nonequivalent sister cells that are born by anterior-posterior cell divisions. We have observed the interaction between POP-1 and a target gene that it represses as it responds to Wnt signaling. Dynamic observations in living embryos reveal that POP-1 undergoes Wnt-dependent nucleocytoplasmic redistribution immediately following cytokinesis, explaining the differential nuclear POP-1 levels in nonequivalent sister cells. In unsignaled (anterior) but not Wnt-signaled (posterior) sister cells, POP-1 progressively coalesces into subnuclear domains during interphase, coincident with its action as a repressor. While the asymmetric distribution of POP-1 in nonequivalent sisters apparently requires a 124-amino-acid internal domain, neither the HMG box nor beta-catenin interaction domains are required. We find that a transcriptional activator, MED-1, associates in vivo with the end-1 and end-3 target genes in the mesoderm (anterior sister) and in the endoderm (posterior sister) following the asymmetric cell division that subdivides the mesendoderm. However, in the anterior sister, binding of POP-1 to the end-1 and end-3 genes blocks their expression. In vivo, binding of POP-1 to the end-1 and end-3 targets (in the posterior sister) is blocked by Wnt/MAPK signaling. Thus, a Tcf/Lef factor represses transactivation of genes in an unsignaled daughter cell by abrogating the function of a bound activator.
94	NR	12119189	Cardiovascular Genetics, Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Department of Clinical-Biological Sciences, University of Basel, Vesalgasse 1, Ch-4051, Basel, Switzerland. andre-r.miserez@unibas.ch
94	DR	12065590	The high mobility group (HMG) proteins of the HMGB family are chromatin-associated proteins that can contribute to transcriptional control by interaction with certain transcription factors. Using the transcription factor Dof2 and five different maize HMGB proteins, we have examined the specificity of the HMGB-transcription factor interaction. The HMG-box DNA binding domain of HMGB1 is sufficient for the interaction with Dof2. Although all tested HMGB proteins can interact with Dof2, the various HMGB proteins stimulate the binding of Dof2 to its DNA target site with different efficiencies. The HMGB5 protein is clearly the most potent facilitator of Dof2 DNA binding. Maximal stimulation of the DNA binding by the HMGB proteins requires association of HMGB and Dof2 prior to DNA binding. HMGB5 and Dof2 form a ternary complex with the DNA, but within the protein-DNA complex the interaction of HMGB5 and Dof2 is different from that in solution, as in contrast to the proteins in solution, they cannot be cross-linked with glutaraldehyde when bound to DNA. Phosphorylation of HMGB1 by protein kinase CK2 abolishes the interaction with Dof2 and the stimulation of Dof2 DNA binding. These findings indicate that transcription factors may recruit certain members of the HMGB family as assistant factors.
94	DR	12032298	BRAF35, a structural DNA-binding protein, initially was identified as a component of a large BRCA2-containing complex. Biochemical analysis revealed the presence of a smaller core-BRAF35 complex devoid of BRCA2. Here we report the isolation of a six-subunit core-BRAF35 complex with the capacity to deacetylate histones, termed the BRAF-histone deacetylase complex (BHC), from human cells. BHC contains polypeptides reminiscent of the chromatin-remodeling complexes SWI/SNF and NuRD (nucleosome remodeling and deacetylating). Similar to NuRD, BHC contains an Mi2-like subunit, BHC80, and a PHD zinc-finger subunit as well as histone deacetylases 1/2 and an MTA-like subunit, the transcriptional corepressor CoREST. We show that BHC mediates repression of neuron-specific genes through the cis-regulatory element known as the repressor element 1 or neural restrictive silencer (RE1/NRS). Chromatin-immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrate the recruitment of BHC by the neuronal repressor REST. Expression of BRAF35 containing a single point mutation in the HMG domain of the protein abrogated REST-mediated transcriptional repression. These results demonstrate a role for core-BRAF35-containing complex in the regulation of neuron-specific genes through modulation of the chromatin structure.
94	NR	12011083	It has been reported that there is a coordinate regulation of sterol 27-hydroxylase (CYP27A1) and cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1) in rats. Thus, the levels of the mRNA corresponding to these two enzymes were found to change in the same direction in rat liver and in isolated rat hepatocytes. In contrast, other groups have not seen such regulation of CYP27A1 in rabbit liver or in rat liver when using an activity assay. In the present work, the effect of bile acid treatment on human CYP27A1/luciferase reporter activity was studied in a transient transfection assay in human liver-derived HepG2 cells. Neither the endogenous 27-hydroxylase activity nor the CYP27A1/luciferase reporter activity were down-regulated by treatment of HepG2 cells with chenodeoxycholic acid or taurochenodeoxycholic acid. We also measured CYP27A1 mRNA and CYP7A1 mRNA in liver of humans subjected to treatment with chenodeoxycholic acid, ursodeoxycholic acid, hydroxymethylglutaryl (HMG)-CoA reductase inhibitor and a combination of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor and cholestyramine. There was a 60-fold variation in the levels of CYP7A1 mRNA but only a 5-fold variation in the levels of CYP27A1 mRNA. There was no correlation between the two mRNA species. It is concluded that, in humans, there is little or no coordinate regulation of CYP7A1 and CYP27A1 at the transcriptional level, and that CYP27A1 is not subject to a negative feedback control by bile acids. The results underline that marked species differences may exist in mechanisms for control of synthesis of bile acids and cholesterol homeostasis.
94	DR	11989650	Expression of the haptoglobin (Hp) gene is liver specific and acute phase (AP) responsive. It was previously shown that transcriptional induction process of the rat Hp gene during turpentine induced AP response has been mediated by the liver nucleoprotein p29 which was shown to be homologous to the HMG-1 chromatin-associated protein. The results presented in this report offered further evidence for the existence of structural and functional similarities between these two proteins implicating an involvement of HMG-1 in the regulation of the rat Hp gene transcription. By DNA binding assays we found the HMG-1 binding sites in the rat Hp gene cis-regulatory subelements A and C and revealed an increase in its DNA-binding after induction of AP response. In view of our previous and here shown data we assume that this increase could be a consequence of AP-induced release of HMG-1 from the chromatin and subsequent increase in its nuclear amount.
94	NR	11934263	The Wnt signalling cascade plays an important role during embryonic patterning and cell fate determination and is highly conserved throughout evolution. Factors of the TCF/LEF HMG domain family (Tcfs) are the downstream effectors of this signal transduction pathway. Upon Wnt signalling, a cascade is initiated that results in the translocation of beta-catenin to the nucleus, where it interacts with Tcf to generate a transcriptionally active complex. This bipartite transcription factor is targeted to the upstream regulatory regions of Tcf target genes. In the absence of Wnt signals, beta-catenin is degraded in the cytoplasm via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Several proteins are instrumental in achieving this tight regulation of beta-catenin levels in the cell, including adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), GSK3 beta, and Axin/Conductin. Deregulation of the Wnt signalling pathway is implicated in several forms of cancer, such as colon carcinoma and melanoma. This deregulation is achieved via mutation of APC, beta-catenin or Axin, resulting in elevated beta-catenin levels and the presence of constitutively active Tcf-beta-catenin complexes in the nucleus. The accompanying inappropriate activation of target genes is considered to be a critical, early event in this carcinogenesis. In addition to regulating beta-catenin levels, normal healthy cells have evolved a second level of regulation, by manipulating the activity of the Tcf proteins themselves. In the absence of Wnt signalling, Tcf complexes with several transcriptional repressor proteins ensuring active repression of Tcf target genes. In this review the dual role of Tcf proteins in the Wnt signalling cascade will be discussed.
94	DR	11891405	High-mobility group (HMG) proteins are architectural factors that have been shown to play a role in the transcriptional regulation of various mammalian genes. One family of HMG proteins, HMG-I/Y, is known to facilitate the initiation of gene transcription by modifying the conformation of DNA and recruiting transcription factors into an organized complex on transcriptional regulatory regions of specific genes. In many circumstances, the nuclear factor-kappaB family of transcription factors is involved in gene regulation that is mediated by HMG-I/Y. We will review the mechanisms by which HMG-I/Y proteins regulate gene transcription, give an overview of selected genes regulated by HMG-I/Y, summarize the potential roles of these genes in critical illnesses, and provide more detailed information about the role of HMG-I/Y in the regulation of nitric oxide synthase-2 during an inflammatory response, such as endotoxemia/sepsis.
94	NR	11861482	Localised activation of the Ras/Raf pathway by Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) signalling specifies the formation of veins in the Drosophila wing. However, little is known about how the EGFR signal regulates transcriptional responses during the vein/intervein cell fate decision. We provide evidence that EGFR signalling induces expression of vein-specific genes by inhibiting the Capicua (Cic) HMG-box repressor, a known regulator of embryonic body patterning. Lack of Cic function causes ectopic expression of EGFR targets such as argos, ventral veinless and decapentaplegic and leads to formation of extra vein tissue. In vein cells, EGFR signalling downregulates Cic protein levels in the nucleus and relieves repression of vein-specific genes, whereas intervein cells maintain high levels of Cic throughout larval and pupal development, repressing the expression of vein-specific genes and allowing intervein differentiation. However, regulation of some EGFR targets such as rhomboid appears not to be under direct control of Cic, suggesting that EGFR signalling branches out in the nucleus and controls different targets via distinct mediator factors. Our results support the idea that localised inactivation of transcriptional repressors such as Cic is a rather general mechanism for regulation of target gene expression by the Ras/Raf pathway.
94	NR	11855751	PURPOSE: TZT-1027, an antimicrotubule agent that inhibits the polymerization of tubulin, shows potent antitumor activity in various transplantable tumor models in vivo. The high antitumor activity of TZT-1027 prompted us to speculate that this compound may have a mode of action other than its antimicrotubule and antimitotic activities. To elucidate the interaction of antitumor cytokines with TZT-1027 in tumors in vivo, we examined the antitumor activity of this agent against various cytokine gene-transfected Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) cells inoculated into C57BL/6 mice. METHODS: In vitro growth inhibition was evaluated using the MTT assay, and in vivo activity was evaluated in subcutaneous models in C57BL/6 mice. The status of the vasculature in tumor tissues was evaluated immunohistochemically using anti-CD31 antibody. We used a cDNA macroarray to examine the gene expression profiles in tumor tissues removed from mice. RESULTS: TZT-1027 at 3 mg/kg showed potent antitumor activity in Mock (LLC-Neo cells) inoculated mice with a T/C% value of 16%. TZT-1027 at 3 mg/kg showed more potent antitumor activity in LLC-TNF cells and LLC-IL6 cells with T/C% values of 4% and 3%, respectively. TZT-1027 treatment destroyed the tumor vasculature as well as tumor cells in LLC-TNF and LLC-IL6 tissues of mice treated with TZT-1027. The LLC-TNF and LLC-IL6 tissues of mice treated with TZT-1027 had in common the independent alteration of the non-histone chromosomal protein HMG-14 and transcription factor 1 for heat shock gene. Focusing on the gene regulation related to angiogenesis, the alteration in transcriptional factors such as ets family genes and homeobox family genes was remarkable. CONCLUSIONS: These factors are candidates as determinants of the enhanced TZT-1027 antitumor activity in relation to these cytokines.
94	NR	11848476	In order to identify genes associated with metastasis of ductal pancreatic adenocarcinoma we investigated pancreatic tumor cell lines derived from an orthotopic pancreatic tumor model in SCID mice. Transcriptional profiling (Affymetrix Gene Chip Technology) was performed with cell lines derived from the primary tumor and metastatic lesions such as mesentery, liver and lungs. We scored for genes commonly deregulated in the cell lines derived from the metastatic lesions. Of 7070 genes investigated, 59 (0.83%) were found to be deregulated in the cell lines derived from the metastatic lesions. We grouped these genes into different categories such as transcription, translation, cytoskeleton, cell adhesion, chromosome instability, tumor suppressor genes, enzymes and "others". The most remarkable features of the system are the up-regulation of high mobility group protein HMG-I (Y), twenty-one ribosomal proteins, GAPDH and the laminin receptor in the cell lines derived from the metastatic lesions, whereas tumor suppressor genes such as maspin and RB1 were down-regulated. Inhibition or reconstitution of the activity of these targets are an emerging strategy for inhibition of metastasis in this system.
94	NR	11792726	Lanosterol 14alpha-demethylase (CYP51) produces follicular fluid meiosis-activating sterol (FF-MAS), which is converted further to testis meiosis-activating sterol (T-MAS). MAS are intermediates in the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway, with the ability to trigger resumption of oocyte meiosis in vitro. In contrast to the liver, where pre- and post-MAS genes are upregulated coordinately at the level of transcription by a cholesterol feedback mechanism through sterol regulatory element-binding proteins (SREBP), regulation differs in the testis. Genes encoding pre-MAS enzymes [HMG-CoA synthase (SYN), HMG-CoA reductase (RED), farnesyl diphosphate synthase (FPP), squalene synthase (SS), and CYP51] are upregulated during sexual development of the testis, although not all genes are turned on at the same time. Furthermore, two post-MAS genes, C-4 sterol methyl oxidase and sterol Delta(7)-reductase, are expressed at low levels and are not upregulated either in rat or human. This transcriptional discrepancy seems to be SREBP independent. Besides cAMP/cAMP-responsive element modulator, other unknown transcription factors control expression of individual cholesterogenic genes during spermatogenesis. HPLC analysis shows an 8-fold increase in T-MAS during development of rat testis whereas MAS is barely detectable in livers of the same animals.We propose that the lack of a coordinate transcriptional control over the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway contributes importantly to overproduction of the signaling sterol T-MAS in testis.
94	DR	11782559	High-mobility group (HMG) proteins are architectural factors that have been shown to play a role in the transcriptional regulation of various mammalian genes. One family of HMG proteins, HMG-I/Y, is known to facilitate the initiation of gene transcription by modifying the conformation of DNA and recruiting transcription factors into an organized complex on transcriptional regulatory regions of specific genes. In many circumstances, the nuclear factor-kappa B family of transcription factors is involved in gene regulation that is mediated by HMG-I/Y. We will review the mechanisms by which HMG-I/Y proteins regulate gene transcription, give an overview of selected genes regulated by HMG-I/Y, summarize the potential roles of these genes in critical illnesses, and provide more detailed information about the role of HMG-I/Y in the regulation of nitric oxide synthase-2 during an inflammatory response, such as endotoxemia/sepsis.
94	NR	11772951	Functional foods enriched with plant stanols lower atherogenic LDL cholesterol concentrations. This effect is caused at least partly by a decreased intestinal cholesterol absorption. It has been suggested that LDL production is reduced after plant stanol consumption, but it is unknown whether LDL receptor expression is affected and contributes to the LDL-lowering effect of plant stanols. Markers for endogenous cholesterol synthesis (lathosterol) increase, but it is not known how this higher cholesterol synthesis is regulated at the molecular level. In a double-blind placebo controlled trial, we have found that compared with the control group (N=15), daily consumption of 3.8-4.0 g plant stanol esters (N=29) for 8 weeks increased LDL receptor mRNA levels in human mononuclear blood cells by 43% (P=0.003). LDL receptor protein concentrations on the surface of monocytes and T lymphocytes increased by 37% (P=0.003) and 25% (P=0.013), suggesting an increased translation. This increased protein expression appeared to be functional, since changes in serum LDL cholesterol correlated negatively with changes in LDL receptor mRNA levels (r=-0.361; P=0.015) and changes in LDL receptor protein expression in monocytes (r=-0.440; P<0.001) and T lymphocytes (r=-0.307; P=0.018). Based on these results, we suggest that the higher LDL receptor expression contributed to a lowered LDL formation along the apoB cascade. Whole body cholesterol synthesis increased, as indicated by the rise in serum cholesterol-standardized lathosterol concentrations, but the 34% increased HMG-CoA reductase mRNA concentrations did not reach statistical significance. Nor did it correlate significantly with changes in serum cholesterol-standardized lathosterol concentrations. This suggests that HMG-CoA reductase may be only partly regulated at a transcriptional level.
94	DR	11748232	The recently cloned gene p73 is a close homologue of p53, which is a crucial tumor suppressor gene for preventing the malignant transformation of cells by inducing cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Previous reports have shown that architectural DNA-bending/looping chromosomal proteins HMGB1 and HMGB2 (formerly known as HMG1 and HMG2), which function in a number of biological processes including transcription and DNA repair, interact in vitro with p53 and stimulate p53 binding to DNA containing p53 consensus sites. Here, we report that HMGB1 physically interacts with two splicing variants of p73, alpha and beta (pull-down assay), and enhances binding of p73 to specific cognate DNA sites (gel-shift assay). Both HMG box domains of HMGB1, A and B, interact with p73alpha. Association of HMGB1 with p73, like the demonstrated ability of HMGB1 to stimulate p73 binding to different p53-responsive elements, requires the oligomerization region and/or region between DNA-binding domain and oligomerization domain of p73 (residues 312-381). Transient transfections revealed that ectopically expressed or endogenous HMGB1 and HMGB2 (antisense strategy) significantly inhibit in vivo both p73alpha/beta- and p53-dependent transactivation from the Bax gene promoter (and much less from Mdm2 and p21(waf1) promoters) in p53-deficient SAOS-2 cells. In contrast, HMGB1 and HGMB2 stimulate p73- or p53-dependent transactivation in p53-deficient H1299 cells, irrespective of the promoter used. Our results suggest that ubiquitously expressed HMGB1 and HMGB2 have potential to cell- and promoter-specifically down- or up-regulate in vivo transcriptional activity of different members of the p53 family. A possible mechanism of HMGB1-mediated modulation of p73- and p53-dependent transactivation is discussed.
94	PR	11742996	In Caenorhabditis elegans, histone acetyltransferase CBP-1 counteracts the repressive activity of the histone deacetylase HDA-1 to allow endoderm differentiation, which is specified by the E cell. In the sister MS cell, the endoderm fate is prevented by the action of an HMG box-containing protein, POP-1, through an unknown mechanism. In this study, we show that CBP-1, HDA-1 and POP-1 converge on end-1, an initial endoderm-determining gene. In the E lineage, an essential function of CBP-1 appears to be the activation of end-1 transcription. We further identify a molecular mechanism for the endoderm-suppressive effect of POP-1 in the MS lineage by demonstrating that POP-1 functions as a transcriptional repressor that inhibits inappropriate end-1 transcription. We provide evidence that POP-1 represses transcription via the recruitment of HDA-1 and UNC-37, the C.elegans homolog of the co-repressor Groucho. These findings demonstrate the importance of the interplay between acetyltransferases and deacetylases in the regulation of a critical cell fate-determining gene during development. Furthermore, they identify a strategy by which concerted actions of histone deacetylases and other co-repressors ensure maximal repression of inappropriate cell type-specific gene transcription.
94	NR	11742861	3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG CoA) reductase inhibitors, so-called statins, reduce the relative risk of a major coronary event by lowering the serum cholesterol level. In addition, statins may confer beneficial effects by cholesterol-lowering independent mechanisms, which are incompletely characterized. Because angiotensin II (Ang II) plays crucial roles in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular diseases, we examined the effect of statins on the expression of the Ang II type 1 receptor (AT(1)-R) in cultured vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs). Cerivastatin and fluvastatin reduced the AT(1)-R mRNA and the AT(1)-R protein levels; however, pravastatin lacked this effect. Cerivastatin and fluvastatin suppressed the AT(1)-R promoter activity measured by luciferase assay but did not affect AT(1)-R mRNA stability, suggesting that the suppression occurs at the transcriptional level. Coincubation of VSMCs with mevalonate or geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate but not with farnesyl pyrophosphate reversed the cerivastatin-induced AT(1)-R downregulation. Overexpression of dominant-negative Rho A also suppressed AT(1)-R mRNA expression. Treatment with cerivastatin for 24 hours reduced the calcium response of VSMCs to Ang II. Taken together, statins downregulate AT(1)-R expression through a mevalonate-dependent, geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate-dependent, and Rho A-dependent manner and attenuate the biological function of Ang II. Downregulation of AT(1)-R may contribute to the cholesterol-independent beneficial effect of statins on the cardiovascular system.
94	DR	11741541	Cancer Research Centre and Department of Medical Biology, Laval University, Hotel-Dieu de Quebec, 11 cote du Palais, G1R 2J6, Quebec, Canada.
94	NR	11731332	Fenofibrate is a potent hypolipidemic agent that lowers plasma lipid levels and may thus decrease the incidence of atherosclerosis. Here we investigated the molecular mechanism of fenofibrate's hypolipidemic action by characterizing its in vivo effects on the expression of mRNAs and the activities of pivotal enzymes in cholesterol and triglyceride metabolism in the hamster. Treatment of hamsters with fenofibrate led to a dose-dependent reduction in serum cholesterol concentrations. Studies on the incorporation of [(14)C]acetate and [(14)C]mevalonate into cholesterol suggested that this effect occurs primarily through inhibition of cholesterol biosynthesis at steps prior to mevalonate. Fenofibrate decreased levels of hepatic enzyme activities and mRNAs for 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG CoA) synthase and HMG CoA reductase. A potential mechanism for transcriptional regulation of these enzymes is via SREBP-2 that we found to be suppressed 2-fold by fenofibrate. Fenofibrate also lowered circulatory triglyceride levels. In keeping with the effect, we observed strong suppression of fatty acid synthase, acetyl-CoA carboxylase and apolipoprotein C-III mRNA and stimulation of lipoprotein lipase and acyl-CoA oxidase mRNA in the liver of fenofibrate-treated hamsters. These observations suggest that the effect of fenofibrate on triglyceride metabolism is likely to be a result of both decreased fatty acid synthesis and increased lipoprotein lipase and acyl-CoA oxidase gene expression in the liver. Surprisingly, alterations in lipoprotein lipase, acyl-CoA oxidase, acetyl-CoA carboxylase, and apolipoprotein C-III could not be observed in hamster hepatocytes incubated with fenofibric acid in vitro. These observations raise the possibility that changes in these genes may be secondary to the metabolic alterations occurring in animals but not in cultured cells and thus that the effect of fenofibrate on these genes may be indirect.
94	NR	11718452	We have identified and characterized the approximately 12-kb cDNA of a novel human gene (designated HALR for "homologous to ALR" and given the symbol MLL3 by the HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee) for which open reading frame (ORF) encodes a predicted large hydrophilic nuclear protein comprising 4,025 amino acids with a calculated molecular mass of approximately 443 kD. Within the amino acid sequence of HALR were identified a SUVAR3-9, enhancer of zeste, trithorax (SET) domain, three plant homeodomain (PHD)-type zinc fingers, a high motility group (HMG)-1 box, a leucine-zipper-like pattern, two potential transactivating domains, several nuclear localization signals, and multiple nuclear receptor interaction signature motifs. Especially within the SET domain, PHD fingers and several other regions, the HALR protein exhibits significant similarity to ALR (acute lymphoblastic leukemia [ALL]-1 related), ALL-1/myeloid/lymphoid or mixed-lineage leukemia (ALL-1/MLL), and trithorax, evolutionarily conserved proteins that influence differentiation and development. Northern blot analysis demonstrated transcripts of approximately 11-12 kb, while reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) revealed that HALR is expressed in a wide range of human tissues and cancer cell lines. The HALR gene contains 46 exons, is estimated to span >101 kb, and is located on chromosome region 7q36. Terminal 7q deletions are common chromosomal aberrations encountered in hematological neoplasia and in holoprosencephaly 3, a midline embryonic defect involving forebrain development. We have also isolated the partial cDNA of the murine homologue of HALR, which displays high homology to its human counterpart. Taking into consideration its notable protein motifs, ubiquitous expression, evolutionary conservation and chromosomal position, HALR is likely to play a housekeeping role in transcriptional regulation, and may be involved in leukemogenesis and developmental disorders.
94	NR	11716764	The expression of monocyte adhesion molecules, such as VCAM-1 (vascular cell adhesion molecule-1) and E-selectin, on the surface of the endothelium is an important step in the initiation and progression of atherosclerotic lesions. We hypothesized that the inhibition of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) reductase in endothelial cells could influence the expression of VCAM-1 and E-selectin. Using cultured human umbilical vein endothelial cells, we found that mevastatin (0.1-1 microM) significantly reduced the expression of VCAM-1 protein in cells activated by tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) for 7 h. In contrast, TNF-alpha-induced E-selectin protein expression was augmented after mevastatin treatment. Mevastatin inhibited the mRNA expression of both VCAM-1 and E-selectin in TNF-alpha-stimulated endothelial cells. The activity of the transcription factor nuclear factor-kappa B, which is known to regulate the transcription of VCAM-1 and E-selectin, was significantly reduced after incubation with mevastatin. Analysis of the time-dependent variation in the TNF-alpha-induced expression of E-selectin, and estimation of the rate of surface disappearance of E-selectin together with measurement of the amounts of E-selectin molecules secreted, indicated that mevastatin inhibited the surface removal of E-selectin. This is compatible with the observed increase in E-selectin expression after statin treatment. All observed effects of mevastatin were reversed by mevalonate, the product of the HMG-CoA reductase reaction. In conclusion, inhibition of HMG-CoA reductase in endothelial cells attenuates VCAM-1 expression, but increases E-selectin expression, after cytokine induction. These diverse effects are associated with changes in the transcriptional regulation of the two adhesion molecule genes and modulation of the surface removal of E-selectin.
94	PR	11711492	Inhibitors of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase ameliorate atherosclerosis by both cholesterol-dependent and cholesterol-independent mechanisms. We examined whether HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors affect the expression and activity of inducible NO synthase (iNOS) in cultured rat aortic vascular smooth muscle (VSM) cells. Atorvastatin (34 to 68 micromol/L) markedly increased nitrite production, an increase that was essentially abrogated by the NO synthase inhibitor N(G)-monomethyl-L-arginine (500 micromol/L). Activity of iNOS, determined by the conversion of L-arginine to L-citrulline, increased 9-fold after atorvastatin treatment. Western blot and semiquantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction revealed that atorvastatin (34 to 68 micromol/L) strongly upregulated iNOS protein and mRNA levels, respectively. These concentrations of atorvastatin did not cause cytotoxicity, as judged by the cell survival rate. Similarly, simvastatin and lovastatin (34 micromol/L) caused robust upregulation of the iNOS protein level. Transfection experiments demonstrated that the -1034- to 88-bp human iNOS promoter was strongly induced by atorvastatin (34 micromol/L). Electromobility and supershift assays using a nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) consensus oligonucleotide and nuclear extracts from VSM cells as well as transfection studies using an NF-kappaB reporter plasmid suggested that the transcriptional activation of the iNOS gene by atorvastatin is not mediated via the NF-kappaB pathway. We conclude that HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors potently upregulate iNOS expression and activity in VSM cells, at least in part, by transcriptional mechanisms that do not depend on transcription factor NF-kappaB. These effects might have important implications for the impact of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors on atherosclerosis.
94	NR	11577016	Lovastatin, a 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitor, induces growth arrest in a variety of cancer cell lines. Its mechanism of action, however, has not been completely elucidated. E2F-1 is thought to act as an oncogene and a tumour suppressor, with its action probably dependent upon the cellular context. We have shown in this study that transcriptional regulation and proteasomal degradation of E2F-1 are critical regulatory events in lovastatin-induced cell death. Accompanying this is a reduction in the E2F-1-regulated expression of cell cycle genes such as c-myc, cyclin D1, cyclin A and cyclin B1. Cell cycle analysis demonstrated that the accumulation of apoptotic cells was preceded by a progressive decrease in the S-phase cell population in response to lovastatin. Although expression of E2F-1 was reduced in three prostate cancer cell lines-PC-3, LNCaP and DU-145-the p21 and p27 protein levels were not increased in all the cell lines treated, suggesting that increase in p21 and p27 protein expression per se is not responsible for lovastatin-mediated down-regulation of E2F-1. The subsequent apoptotic death of these cells in the presence of lovastatin can be prevented by forced ectopic expression of E2F-1. Taken together, these facts imply that E2F-1 is the target of an HMG-CoA inhibitor and critical cell death mediator in prostate cancer cells.
94	PR	11554755	Recently, we demonstrated that mutations in the Sry-related HMG box gene Sox18 underlie vascular and hair follicle defects in the mouse allelic mutants ragged (Ra) and RaJ. Ra mice display numerous anomalies in the homozygote including, oedema, peritoneal secretions, and are almost completely naked. Sox18 and the MADS box transcription factor, Mef2C, are expressed in developing endothelial cells. Null mutants in Sox18 and Mef2c display overlapping phenotypic abnormalities, hence, we investigated the relationship between these two DNA binding proteins. We report here the direct interaction between MEF2C and SOX18 proteins, and establish that these proteins are coexpressed in vivo in endothelial cell nuclei. MEF2C expression potentiates SOX18-mediated transcription in vivo and regulates the function of the SOX18 activation domain. Interestingly, MEF2C fails to interact or co-activate transcription with the Ra or RaJ mutant SOX18 proteins. These results suggest that MEF2C and SOX18 may be important partners directing the transcriptional regulation of vascular development. Copyright 2001 Academic Press.
94	NR	11532988	Microsatellites are common repeated sequences, which are useful as genetic markers and lack any clearly established function. In a previous study we suggested that an intronic polymorphic TCAT repeat in the tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) gene, the microsatellite HUMTH01, may regulate transcription. The TH gene encodes the rate-limiting enzyme in the synthesis of catecholamines, and the microsatellite HUMTH01 has been used in genetic studies of neuropsychiatric and cardiovascular diseases, in which disturbances of catecholaminergic neurotransmission have been implicated. HUMTH01 alleles associated with these diseases act as transcriptional enhancers when linked to a minimal promoter and are recognized by specific nuclear factors. Here we show that allelic variations of HUMTH01 commonly found in humans have a quantitative silencing effect on TH gene expression. Two specific proteins, ZNF191, a zinc finger protein, and HBP1, an HMG box transcription factor, which bind the TCAT motif, were then cloned. Finally, allelic variations of HUMTH01 correlate with quantitative and qualitative changes in the binding by ZNF191. Thus, this repeated sequence may contribute to the control of expression of quantitative genetic traits. As the HUMTH01 core motif is ubiquitous in the genome, this phenomenon may be relevant to the quantitative expression of many genes in addition to TH.
94	PR	11500377	In certain cancers, constitutive Wnt signaling results from mutation in one or more pathway components. The result is the accumulation and nuclear localization of beta-catenin, which interacts with the lymphoid enhancer factor-1 (LEF)/T-cell factor (TCF) family of HMG-box transcription factors, which activate important growth regulatory genes, including cyclin D1 and c-myc. As exemplified by APC and axin, the negative regulation of beta-catenin is important for tumor suppression. Another potential mode of negative regulation is transcriptional repression of cyclin D1 and other Wnt target genes. In mammals, the transcriptional repressors in the Wnt pathway are not well defined. We have previously identified HBP1 as an HMG-box repressor and a cell cycle inhibitor. Here, we show that HBP1 is a repressor of the cyclin D1 gene and inhibits the Wnt signaling pathway. The inhibition of Wnt signaling and growth requires a common domain of HBP1. The apparent mechanism is an inhibition of TCF/LEF DNA binding through a physical interaction with HBP1. These data suggest that the suppression of Wnt signaling by HBP1 may be a mechanism to prevent inappropriate proliferation.
94	NR	11470517	We have characterized the DSox14 gene, a new member of the family of transcription factors related to the mammalian sex determining factor, SRY. It contains two exons and the intron is large for Drosophila at 2.8 kb. The encoded protein consists of 691 amino acids (72 kDa) and includes an HMG box domain, which is closely related to the mouse Sox4 DNA binding domain. Expression of the DSox14 HMG box domain in vitro shows that it binds the sequence AACAAT with a K(d) of 190 nM, generating a bend angle of 48.6 degrees. At higher protein concentrations, a second HMG box binds at the recognition sequence, increasing the bend angle by 5 degrees. DSox14 is variably expressed throughout development as three alternative transcripts but not at all during the 1st and 2nd larval instars. The several mRNA transcripts are produced primarily from different transcriptional start sites. Analysis of the expression of DSox14 mRNAs during early development shows that they are maternally contributed at a low level and ubiquitously expressed during embryogenesis. The widespread pattern of expression suggests that DSox14 affects a large number of target genes.
94	NR	11470468	OBJECTIVE: We tested the hypothesis of beneficial effects of the 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA)-reductase inhibitor simvastatin in a model of ischemia-reperfusion, and investigated potential mechanisms. METHODS: Isolated working rat hearts were subjected to 15 min global ischemia and 22-180 min reperfusion in the presence or absence of simvastatin (10-100 microM). We evaluated creatinephosphokinase and nitrite levels in coronary effluent, heart weight changes, microvascular permeability (extravasation of fluoresceine-labeled albumin), ultrastructural alterations, and the expression of endothelial (e) and inducible (i) nitric oxide synthase (NOS) (by reverse-transcribed polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting) in the presence or absence of the transcriptional inhibitor actinomycin-D. RESULTS: Simvastatin (25 microM) significantly reduced myocardial damage and vascular hyperpermeability, concomitant with a reduction in endothelial and cardiomyocyte lesions. Protection became less evident at 50 microM and reverted to increased damage at 100 microM. At 25 microM, simvastatin significantly increased eNOS mRNA and protein compared with untreated hearts, probably due to a post-transcriptional regulation since unaltered by animal pretreatment with actinomycin D. Simvastatin also significantly decreased iNOS mRNA and protein, as well as nitrite production after ischemia-reperfusion. The addition of the NOS inhibitor N(varpi)-nitro-L-arginine methylester (L-NAME, 30 microM) to 25 microM simvastatin-treated hearts significantly reduced cardioprotection against ischemia-reperfusion. CONCLUSIONS: In this model, in the absence of perfusing granulocytes, the acute administration of a pharmacologically relevant simvastatin concentration reduces ischemia-reperfusion injury and prevents coronary endothelial cell and cardiomyocyte damage by cholesterol-independent, NO-dependent mechanisms.
94	NR	11432837	Yeast Spt16/Cdc68 and Pob3 form a heterodimer that acts in both DNA replication and transcription. This is supported by studies of new alleles of SPT16 described here. We show that Spt16-Pob3 enhances HO transcription through a mechanism that is affected by chromatin modification, since some of the defects caused by mutations can be suppressed by deleting the histone deacetylase Rpd3. While otherwise conserved among many eukaryotes, Pob3 lacks the HMG1 DNA-binding motif found in similar proteins such as the SSRP1 subunit of human FACT. SPT16 and POB3 display strong genetic interactions with NHP6A/B, which encodes an HMG1 motif, suggesting that these gene products function coordinately in vivo. While Spt16-Pob3 and Nhp6 do not appear to form stable heterotrimers, Nhp6 binds to nucleosomes and these Nhp6-nucleosomes can recruit Spt16-Pob3 to form SPN-nucleosomes. These complexes have altered electrophoretic mobility and a distinct pattern of enhanced sensitivity to DNase I. These results suggest that Spt16-Pob3 and Nhp6 cooperate to function as a novel nucleosome reorganizing factor.
94	NR	11390424	Statins are inhibitors of the rate-limiting enzyme in cholesterol synthesis, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase. In addition to reducing LDL cholesterol, statin treatment increases the levels of the antiatherogenic HDL and its major apolipoprotein apoA-I. Here, we investigated the molecular mechanisms of apoA-I regulation by statins. Treatment with statins increased apoA-I mRNA levels in human HepG2 hepatoma cells, and this effect was reversed by the addition of mevalonate, implicating HMG-CoA reductase as the relevant target of these drugs. Pretreatment with Actinomycin D abolished the increase of apoA-I mRNA, indicating that statins act at the transcriptional level. Indeed, statins increased the human apoA-I promoter activity in transfected cells, and we have identified a statin response element that coincides with a PPARalpha response element known to confer fibrate responsiveness to this gene. The statin effect could be abolished not only by mevalonate, but also by geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate, whereas inhibition of geranylgeranyl transferase activity or treatment with an inhibitor of the Rho GTP-binding protein family increased PPARalpha activity. Using dominant negative forms of these proteins, we found that Rho A itself mediates this response. Because cotreatment with statins and fibrates activated PPARalpha in a synergistic manner, these observations provide a molecular basis for combination treatment with statins and fibrates in coronary heart disease.
94	PR	11390395	Previously, we have demonstrated that oxidative stress or Ras/ERK activation leads to the transcriptional repression of alpha-subunit of epithelial Na(+) channel (ENaC) in lung and salivary epithelial cells. Here, we further investigated the coordinated molecular mechanisms by which alpha-ENaC expression is regulated. Using both stable and transient transfection assays, we demonstrate that the overexpression of high mobility group protein I-C (HMGI-C), a Ras/ERK-inducible HMG-I family member, represses glucocorticoid receptor (GR)/dexamethasone (Dex)-stimulated alpha-ENaC/reporter activity in salivary epithelial cells. Northern analyses further confirm that the expression of endogenous alpha-ENaC gene in salivary Pa-4 cells is suppressed by an ectopic HMGI-C overexpression. Through yeast two-hybrid screening and co-immunoprecipitation assays from eukaryotic cells, we also discovered the interaction between HMGI-C and PIAS3 (protein inhibitor of activated STAT3 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 3)). A low level of ectopically expressed PIAS3 cooperatively inhibits GR/Dex-dependent alpha-ENaC transcription in the presence of HMGI-C. Reciprocally, HMGI-C expression also coordinately enhances PIAS3-mediated repression of STAT3-dependent transactivation. Moreover, overexpression of antisense HMGI-C construct is capable of reversing the repression mediated by Ras V12 on GR- and STAT3-dependent transcriptional activation. Together, our results demonstrate that Ras/ERK-mediated induction of HMGI-C is required to effectively repress GR/Dex-stimulated transcription of alpha-ENaC gene and STAT3-mediated transactivation. These findings delineate a network of inhibitory signaling pathways that converge on HMGI-C.PIAS3 complex, causally associating Ras/ERK activation with the repression of both GR and STAT3 signaling pathways in salivary epithelial cells.
94	NR	11368018	The unusually low hepatic ketogenic capacity of piglets has been correlated with lack of expression of the mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase gene. However, we have shown that starvation of 2-week-old piglets increased the mRNA levels of mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase to a level similar to that observed in starved rats (S. H. Adams, C. S. Alho, G. Asins, F. G. Hegardt, and P. F. Marrero, 1997, Biochem. J. 324, 65-73). We now report that antibodies against pig mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase detected the pig enzyme in mitochondria of 2-week-old starved piglets and that the pig mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase cDNA encodes an active enzyme in the eukaryotic cell line Mev-1, with catalytic behavior similar to that of the rat enzyme when expressed in the same system. We also show that low activity of pig mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase correlates with low expression of the pig enzyme. The discrepancy in mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase gene expression between the high levels of mRNA and low levels of enzyme was not associated with differences in transcript maturation, which suggests that an attenuated translation of the pig mRNA is responsible for the diminished ketogenic capacity of pig mitochondria.
94	PR	11344167	The structure-specific recognition protein SSRP1, initially isolated from expression screening of a human B-cell cDNA library for proteins that bind to cisplatin (cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II))-modified DNA, contains a single DNA-binding high mobility group (HMG) domain. Human SSRP1 purifies as a heterodimer of SSRP1 and Spt16 (FACT) that alleviates the nucleosomal block to transcription elongation by RNAPII in vitro. The affinity and specificity of FACT, SSRP1, and the isolated HMG domain of SSRP1 for cisplatin-damaged DNA were investigated by gel mobility shift assays. FACT exhibits both affinity and specificity for DNA damaged globally with cisplatin compared with unmodified DNA or DNA damaged globally with the clinically ineffective trans-DDP isomer. FACT binds the major 1,2-d(GpG) intrastrand cisplatin adduct, but its isolated SSRP1 subunit fails to form discrete, high affinity complexes with cisplatin-modified DNA under similar conditions. These results suggest that Spt16 primes SSRP1 for cisplatin-damaged DNA recognition by unveiling its HMG domain. As expected, the isolated HMG domain of SSRP1 is sufficient for specific binding to cisplatin-damaged DNA and binds the major cisplatin 1,2-d(GpG) intrastrand cross-link. The affinity and specificity of FACT for cisplatin-modified DNA, as well as its importance for transcription of chromatin, suggests that the interaction of FACT and cisplatin-damaged DNA may be crucial to the anticancer mechanism of cisplatin.
94	NR	11222952	Blattella germanica has two cytosolic 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) synthase genes, HMG-CoA synthase-1 and -2. HMG-CoA synthase-1 gene shows several features of processed genes (retroposons): it contains no introns but has a short direct-repeat sequence (ATTATTATT) at both ends. An atypical feature is the presence at both ends of the gene of short inverse repeats flanked by direct repeats. There is neither a TATA box nor a CAAT box in the 5' region. Comparative analysis with other species suggests that the HMG-CoA synthase-1 gene derives from HMG-CoA synthase-2. Cultured embryonic B. germanica UM-BGE-1 cells express HMG-CoA synthase-1 but not HMG-CoA synthase-2, suggesting that the intron-less gene is functional. In addition, it can complement MEV-1 cell line, which is auxotrophic for mevalonate. We show that compactin and mevalonate do not significantly affect the mRNA levels of HMG-CoA synthase-1 in UM-BGE-1 cells. Compactin induces a 6.7-fold increase in HMG-CoA reductase activity, which is restored to normal levels by mevalonate. HMG-CoA synthase activity is not modified by either of these effectors, suggesting that the mevalonate pathway in this insect cell line is regulated by post-transcriptional mechanisms affecting HMG-CoA reductase but not HMG-CoA synthase.
94	NR	11222738	Protein-directed DNA bending is proposed to regulate assembly of higher-order DNA-multiprotein complexes (enhanceosomes and repressosomes). Because transcriptional initiation is a nonequilibrium process, gene expression may be modulated by the lifetime of such complexes. The human testis-determining factor SRY contains a specific DNA-bending motif, the high-mobility group (HMG) box, and is thus proposed to function as an architectural factor. Here, we test the hypothesis that the kinetic stability of a bent HMG box-DNA complex can in itself modulate transcriptional potency. Our studies employ a cotransfection assay in a mammalian gonadal cell line as a model for SRY-dependent transcriptional activation. Whereas sex-reversal mutations impair SRY-dependent gene expression, an activating substitution is identified that enhances SRY's potency by 4-fold. The substitution (I13F in the HMG box; fortuitously occurring in chimpanzees) affects the motif's cantilever side chain, which inserts between base pairs to disrupt base pairing. An aromatic F13 cantilever prolongs the lifetime of the DNA complex to an extent similar to its enhanced function. By contrast, equilibrium properties (specific DNA affinity, specificity, and bending; thermodynamic stability and cellular expression) are essentially unchanged. This correlation between potency and lifetime suggests a mechanism of kinetic control. We propose that a locked DNA bend enables multiple additional rounds of transcriptional initiation per promoter. This model predicts the occurrence of a novel class of clinical variants: bent but unlocked HMG box-DNA complexes with native affinity and decreased lifetime. Aromatic DNA-intercalating agents exhibit analogous kinetic control of transcriptional elongation whereby chemotherapeutic potencies correlate with drug-DNA dissociation rates.
94	NR	11219190	HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, or statins, are lipid-lowering agents that have been shown to effectively decrease severe rejection periods and development of transplant coronary artery disease after heart transplantation. Precise regulation of major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC class II) gene expression plays a pivotal role in control of the immune response after transplantation. The aim of this study was to evaluate the potential role of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors in regulating the immune response. We have examined the effects of simvastatin on MHC class II expression in primary human endothelial cells. Using RNAse protection assay and flow cytometry, we observed that simvastatin dose-dependently reduced interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) induced MHC class II expression (mRNA and protein). In contrast, simvastatin did not affect the expression of MHC class I, pointing to specific actions in the MHC class II signalling cascade. The transcriptional coactivator CIITA is the general regulator of both constitutive and inducible MHC class II expression. After stimulation with IFN-gamma, the CIITA gene is selectively activated via one (promotor IV) of its four promoters. Interestingly, mRNA levels of CIITA were decreased after treatment with simvastatin. In addition, using transient transfections of promoter-reporter constructs we observed that the activity of CIITA promoter IV was decreased by simvastatin. In conclusion, simvastatin selectively decreases IFN-gamma-induced MHC class II expression in human primary endothelial cells through actions on the CIITA promoter IV. Thus, the beneficial effects of statins reported after heart transplantation may result from this immunosuppressive action, suggesting possible therapeutic use for other immunological disorders as well.
94	DR	11169970	The highly conserved homeodomains and HMG domains are components of a large number of proteins that play a role in the transcriptional regulation of gene expression during embryogenesis. Both the HMG domain and the homeodomain serve as interfaces for factor interactions with DNA, as well as with other proteins, and it is likely that the high degree of structural and sequence conservation within these domains reflects the conservation of basic aspects of these interactions. Classical HMG domain proteins have an ancient origin, being found in all eukaryotes, and are thought to have given rise to the metazoan-specific class of HMG domain proteins called the Sox proteins. Similarly, the metazoan-specific POU domain proteins are thought to have arisen from genes encoding ancestral homeodomain proteins. In this review, we summarize several examples of different HMG-homeodomain interactions that illustrate not only the ancient origin of each of these protein families, but also their relationship to each other, and discuss how coevolution of HMG and homeodomains may have lead to creation of the specialized Sox/POU protein complexes. Using the FGF-4 gene as an example, we also speculate on how coevolution of regulatory Sox/POU target DNA sequences may have occurred, and how the summation of these changes may have lead to the emergence of new developmental pathways. Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
94	NR	11160904	The DAN/TIR mannoprotein genes of Saccharomyces cerevisiae (DAN1, DAN2, DAN3, DAN4, TIR1, TIR2, TIR3 and TIR4) are expressed in anaerobic cells while the predominant cell wall proteins Cwp1 and Cwp2 are down-regulated. Elements involved in activation and repression of the DAN/TIR genes were defined in this study, using the DAN1 promoter as a model. Nested deletions in a DAN1/lacZ reporter pinpointed regions carrying activation and repression elements. Inspection revealed two consensus sequences subsequently shown to be independent anaerobic response elements (AR1, consensus TCGTTYAG; AR2, consensus AAAAATTGTTGA). AR1 is found in all of the DAN/TIR promoters; AR2 is found in DAN1, DAN2 and DAN3. A 120 bp segment carrying two copies of AR1 preferentially activated transcription of lacZ under anaerobic conditions. A fusion of three synthetic copies of AR1 to MEL1 was also expressed anaerobically. Mutations in either AR1 site within the 120 bp segment caused a drastic loss of expression, indicating that both are necessary for activation and implying cooperativity between adjacent transcriptional activation complexes. A single AR2 site carried on a 46 bp fragment from the DAN1 promoter activated lacZ transcription under anaerobic conditions, as did a 26 bp synthetic AR2 fragment fused to MEL1. Nucleotide substitutions within the AR2 sequence eliminated the activity of the 46 bp segment. Ablation of the AR2 sequences in the full promoter caused a partial reduction of expression. The presence of the ATTGTT core (recognized by HMG proteins) in the AR2 sequence suggests that an HMG protein may activate through AR2. One region was implicated in aerobic repression of DAN1. It contains sites for the heme-induced Mot3 and Rox1 repressors.
94	NR	11128568	Members of the Tcf family of HMG box-containing transcriptional regulators mediate Wnt signalling in the nucleus. Current models suggest that in the absence of Wnt signalling, Tcf interacts with the repressor protein Groucho and suppresses the expression of Wnt targets. Wnt signalling leads to increases in the level of cytoplasmic beta catenin, which enters the nucleus, displaces Tcf from Groucho and leads to transcriptional activation. In order to test this model we have studied the effects of Drosophila Tcf (dTcf) on signalling by Wingless, a Drosophila member of the Wnt family. We show that overexpression of wild-type dTcf during the development and patterning of the wing antagonises Wingless signalling. Furthermore, increases in the concentration of Armadillo, the Drosophila homologue of beta catenin, do not appear to be sufficient to trigger the change from antagonism to activation. This leads us to suggest that the inactivation of the repressive activity of dTcf requires the activity of Wingless in a manner that is independent of Armadillo. We observe that a Groucho molecule devoid of the WD40 repeats can interact with dTcf and acts as a dominant repressor of Wingless signalling in vivo and in vitro. Coexpression of this molecule with dTcf however, does not lead to enhancement of the repressive effects of dTcf alone. This observation suggests that repression by dTcf might not simply be mediated by an interaction with Groucho but that dTcf may have an intrinsic repressive activity that has to be antagonised by Wingless signalling.
94	PR	11118215	The Saccharomyces cerevisiae NHP6A and NHP6B proteins are chromatin architectural factors, functionally and structurally related to the mammalian high mobility group (HMG)-1 and -2 proteins, a family of non-sequence-specific DNA binding proteins. nhp6a nhp6b mutants have various morphological defects and are defective in the induced expression of several RNA polymerase II-transcribed genes. We found that NHP6A/B proteins are also required for full induction of the yeast CHA1 gene. Importantly, CHA1 basal level expression is increased 10-fold in an nhp6a nhp6b double deletion mutant. Micrococcal nuclease and DNase I analysis of the CHA1 gene in this strain showed an open promoter structure, characteristic of the activated state of this promoter, even under non-inducing conditions. To address the possible function of the NHP6A/B proteins in chromatin-mediated gene regulation, we performed whole-genome transcriptional profiling of a Deltanhp6a Deltanhp6b yeast strain. Our results suggest that NHP6A/B proteins play an important regulatory role, repressing as well as potentiating expression of genes involved in several cellular processes, and that NHP6A/B control is exerted at the level of the individual gene.
94	PR	11103788	Sox proteins belong to the superfamily of high mobility group (HMG) proteins. Sox3 is expressed predominantly in the immature neuroepithelium. Ectopic expression of Sox3 causes oncogenic transformation of chicken embryo fibroblasts (CEFs). The oncogenicity of Sox3 is correlated with nuclear localization and transcriptional regulatory activity; mutants containing deletions in the HMG box or the transactivation domain fail to induce foci of transformation. These observations suggest that Sox proteins can induce aberrant cell growth and strengthen the link of HMG proteins to oncogenesis.
94	PR	11044097	HMG I/Y appears to be a multifunctional protein that relies on in its ability to interact with DNA in a structure-specific manner and with DNA, binding transcriptional activators via distinct protein-protein interaction surfaces. To investigate the hypothesis that HMG I/Y may have a role in human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) expression, we have analyzed whether HMG I/Y interacts with the 5' long terminal repeat and whether this interaction can modulate transcription factor binding. Using purified recombinant HMG I, we have identified several high-affinity binding sites which overlap important transcription factor binding sites. One of these HMG I binding sites coincides with an important binding site for AP-1 located downstream of the transcriptional start site, in the 5' untranslated region at the boundary of a positioned nucleosome. HMG I binding to this composite site inhibits the binding of recombinant AP-1. Consistent with this observation, using nuclear extracts prepared from Jurkat T cells, we show that HMG I (but not HMG Y) is strongly induced upon phorbol myristate acetate stimulation and this induced HMG I appears to both selectively inhibit the binding of basal DNA-binding proteins and enhance the binding of an inducible AP-1 transcription factor to this AP-1 binding site. We also report the novel finding that a component present in this inducible AP-1 complex is ATF-3. Taken together, these results argue that HMG I may play a fundamental role in HIV-1 expression by determining the nature of transcription factor-promoter interactions.
94	DR	11034995	High mobility group (HMG) proteins HMGI, HMGY, HMGI-C, and Chironomus HMGI are DNA-binding proteins thought to modulate the assembly and the function of transcriptional complexes. Each of these proteins contains three DNA-binding domains (DBD), properties of which appear to be regulated by phosphorylation. High levels of these proteins are characteristic for rapidly dividing cells in embryonic tissues and tumors. On the basis of their occurrence, specific functions for each of these proteins have been postulated. In this study we demonstrate differences in the nature of contacts of these proteins with promoter region of the interferon-beta gene. We show that HMGI and HMGY interact with this DNA via three DBDs, whereas HMGI-C and Chironomus HMGI bind to this DNA using only two domains. Phosphorylation of HMGY protein by Cdc2 kinase leads to impairing of contacts between the N-terminally located DBD and a single promoter element. The perturbations in the architecture of the protein.DNA complexes involve changes in the degree of unbending of the intrinsically bent IFNbeta promoter. Our results provide first insights into the molecular basis of functional specificity of proteins of the HMGI/Y family and their regulation by phosphorylation.
94	NR	11007889	The nonhistone chromosomal proteins high mobility group I(Y) [HMG I(Y)] have been shown to function as architectural transcription factors facilitating enhanceosome formation on a variety of mammalian promoters. Specifically, they have been shown to act as a "molecular glue" mediating protein-protein and protein-DNA contacts within the enhanceosome complex. HMG I(Y) proteins are expressed at high levels in embryonic and transformed cells and have been implicated in transcriptional regulation in these cells. Terminally differentiated cells, however, have been reported to express only minimal, if any, HMG I(Y). In contrast to these observations, we show here that adult mouse retinal photoreceptors, which are terminally differentiated cells, express high levels of these proteins. Using retinoblastoma cells as an approximate model, we further demonstrate in transiently transfected cells that inhibition of HMG I(Y) expression and mutation of HMG I(Y) binding sites significantly reduce rhodopsin promoter activity. DNase I footprint analysis indicates that HMG I protein interacts with a discrete site within the rhodopsin proximal promoter. This site overlaps with the binding site for Crx, a paired-like homeodomain transcription factor that is essential for photoreceptor functioning and that when mutated causes several forms of human photoreceptor degeneration. Both biochemical and functional experiments demonstrate that HMG I(Y) physically associate with Crx and that their interaction with DNA is required for high-level transcription of the rhodopsin gene. These data provide the first demonstration that HMG I(Y) can be important for gene activation in terminally differentiated cells.
94	NR	10970793	Steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1) is an orphan member of the nuclear receptor family expressed in steroidogenic tissues, where it has an essential role in the regulation of the steroid hormone biosynthesis, adrenal and gonadal development and endocrine responses fundamental for reproduction. Here we show that SF-1 regulates the transcription of cytosolic 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) synthase gene, which is essential for the endogenous synthesis of cholesterol. We have identified an element located 365 bp upstream of the gene for cytosolic HMG-CoA synthase; SF-1 binds as a monomer to this element and confers SF-1 responsiveness to homologous and heterologous promoters. It has been shown that in tissues with a high demand for cholesterol to be used in steroid synthesis, there is a lack of correlation between the cholesterol levels and the activity of the limiting enzymes of the mevalonate pathway. In accord with those results, we observed that cholesterol synthesis from acetate and either cytosolic HMG-CoA mRNA expression or transcriptional activity were not changed in response to 25-hydroxycholesterol in the SF-1-expressing steroidogenic Leydig tumour MA-10 cells. Moreover, the overexpression of SF-1 in non-steroidogenic CV-1 cells renders them less sensitive to the regulatory effects of cholesterol. This observation led to the hypothesis that in steroidogenic tissues the expression of SF-1 permits high levels of endogenous synthesis of cholesterol irrespective of the intracellular levels of this metabolite.
94	DR	10891489	The HMG-I/Y gene encodes the HMG-I and HMG-Y proteins, which function as architectural chromatin binding proteins important in the transcriptional regulation of several genes. Although increased expression of the HMG-I/Y proteins is associated with cellular proliferation, neoplastic transformation, and several human cancers, the role of these proteins in the pathogenesis of malignancy remains unclear. To better understand the role of these proteins in cell growth and transformation, we have been studying the regulation and function of HMG-I/Y. The HMG-I/Y promoter was cloned, sequenced, and subjected to mutagenesis analysis. A c-Myc-Max consensus DNA binding site was identified as an element important in the serum stimulation of HMG-I/Y. The oncoprotein c-Myc and its protein partner Max bind to this site in vitro and activate transcription in transfection experiments. HMG-I/Y expression is stimulated by c-Myc in a Myc-estradiol receptor cell line in the presence of the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide, indicating that HMG-I/Y is a direct c-Myc target gene. HMG-I/Y induction is decreased in Myc-deficient fibroblasts. HMG-I/Y protein expression is also increased in Burkitt's lymphoma cell lines, which are known to have increased c-Myc protein. Like Myc, increased expression of HMG-I protein leads to the neoplastic transformation of both Rat 1a fibroblasts and CB33 cells. In addition, Rat 1a cells overexpressing HMG-I protein form tumors in nude mice. Decreasing HMG-I/Y proteins using an antisense construct abrogates transformation in Burkitt's lymphoma cells. These findings indicate that HMG-I/Y is a c-Myc target gene involved in neoplastic transformation and a member of a new class of potential oncogenes.
94	DR	10871404	The nature of nuclear structures that are required to confer transcriptional regulation by distal enhancers is unknown. We show that long-range enhancer-dependent beta-globin transcription is achieved in vitro upon addition of the DNA architectural protein HMG I/Y to affinity-enriched holo RNA polymerase II complexes. In this system, HMG I/Y represses promoter activity in the absence of an associated enhancer and strongly activates transcription in the presence of a distal enhancer. Importantly, nucleosome formation is neither necessary for long-range enhancer regulation in vitro nor sufficient without the addition of HMG I/Y. Thus, the modulation of DNA structure by HMG I/Y is a critical regulator of long-range enhancer function on both DNA and chromatin-assembled genes. Electron microscopic analysis reveals that HMG I/Y binds cooperatively to preferred DNA sites to generate distinct looped structures in the presence or absence of the beta-globin enhancer. The formation of DNA topologies that enable distal enhancers to strongly regulate gene expression is an intrinsic property of HMG I/Y and naked DNA.
94	NR	10861207	In eukaryotes the enzyme 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA (HMG-CoA) reductase catalyses the synthesis of mevalonic acid, a common precursor to all isoprenoid compounds. Here we report the isolation and overexpression of the gene coding for HMG-CoA reductase from Leishmania major. The protein from Leishmania lacks the membrane domain characteristic of eukaryotic cells but exhibits sequence similarity with eukaryotic reductases. Highly purified protein was achieved by ammonium sulphate precipitation followed by chromatography on hydroxyapatite. Kinetic parameters were determined for the protozoan reductase, obtaining K(m) values for the overall reaction of 40.3+/-5.8 microM for (R,S)-HMG-CoA and 81.4+/-5.3 microM for NADPH; V(max) was 33.55+/-1.8 units x mg(-1). Gel-filtration experiments suggested an apparent molecular mass of 184 kDa with subunits of 46 kDa. Finally, in order to achieve a better understanding of the role of this enzyme in trypanosomatids, the effect of possible regulators of isoprenoid biosynthesis in cultured promastigote cells was studied. Neither mevalonic acid nor serum sterols appear to modulate enzyme activity whereas incubation with lovastatin results in significant increases in the amount of reductase protein. Western- and Northern-blot analyses indicate that this activation is apparently performed via post-transcriptional control.
94	PR	10848593	Transcriptional induction of the interleukin-2 receptor alpha-chain (IL-2Ralpha) gene is a key event regulating T-cell-mediated immunity in mammals. In vivo, the T-cell-restricted protein Elf-1 and the general architectural transcription factor HMG-I(Y) cooperate in transcriptional regulation of the human IL-2Ralpha gene by binding to a specific positive regulatory region (PRRII) in its proximal promoter. Employing chromatin reconstitution analyses, we demonstrate that the binding sites for both HMG-I(Y) and Elf-1 in the PRRII element are incorporated into a strongly positioned nucleosome in vitro. A variety of analytical techniques was used to determine that a stable core particle is positioned over most of the PRRII element and that this nucleosome exhibits only a limited amount of lateral translational mobility. Regardless of its translational setting, the in vitro position of the nucleosome is such that DNA recognition sequences for both HMG-I(Y) and Elf-1 are located on the surface of the core particle. Restriction nuclease accessibility analyses indicate that a similarly positioned nucleosome also exists on the PRRII element in unstimulated lymphocytes when the IL-2Ralpha gene is silent and suggest that this core particle is remodeled following transcriptional activation of the gene in vivo. In vitro experiments employing the chemical cleavage reagent 1,10-phenanthroline copper (II) covalently attached to its C-terminal end demonstrate that HMG-I(Y) protein binds to the positioned PRRII nucleosome in a direction-specific manner, thus imparting a distinct architectural configuration to the core particle. Together, these findings suggest a role for the HMG-I(Y) protein in assisting the remodeling of a critically positioned nucleosome on the PRRII promoter element during IL-2Ralpha transcriptional activation in lymphocytes in vivo.
94	NR	10777536	In an attempt to identify unknown target genes for SREBP-1, total RNA from a stable Chinese hamster ovary cell line (CHO-487) expressing a mature form of human SREBP-1a (amino acids 1-487) with a LacSwitch Inducible Mammalian Expression System was subjected to a polymerase chain reaction subtraction method. One of the fragments was found to have 90 and 86% homology with rat and human ATP citrate-lyase (ACL) cDNA, respectively. When Hep G2 cells are cultured under either sterol-loaded or -depleted conditions, expression of the gene is induced approximately 2-3-fold by sterol depletion. To investigate the direct effect of SREBP-1a on transcription, luciferase assays using the promoter of the human ACL gene were performed. These deletion studies indicated that a minimum 160-base pair segment contains the information required for the transcriptional regulation brought about by enforced expression of SREBP-1a. Luciferase assays using mutant reporter genes revealed that SREBP-dependent transcriptional regulation is mediated by two nearby motifs, the SREBP-binding site (a TCAGGCTAG sequence) and the NF-Y-binding site (a CCAAT box). It was confirmed by gel mobility shift assays that recombinant SREBP-1a binds to the sequence. Data from studies with transgenic mice and reporter assays show that the ACL gene promoter is activated by SREBP-1a more strongly than SREBP-2 in contrast to the HMG CoA synthase and LDL receptor gene promoters, which exhibit the same preference for the two factors. Therefore, SREBPs transcriptionally regulates ACL enzyme activity, which generates the cytosolic acetyl CoA required for both cholesterol and fatty acid synthesis.
94	NR	10772997	The use of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors (statins) in randomized clinical trials has established that cholesterol-lowering treatment reduces the risk of both cardiovascular and total mortality. This reduction in risk occurs in patients with or without existing cardiovascular disease and in patients with high or average plasma cholesterol concentrations. Aggressive treatment to lower plasma cholesterol has been shown to slow progression of atherosclerosis and in some instances may be as successful as angioplasty in reducing ischemic events. These studies suggest that reduction of plasma cholesterol to levels even below 100 mg/dl might be desirable. New targets for cholesterol-lowering therapy with mechanisms of action different from the statins have been identified. One of these targets is the Na(+)-dependent bile acid transporter that is expressed in the terminal ileum. This protein is responsible for recycling bile acids from the intestine to the liver. Several compounds that demonstrate the ability to decrease transporter activity and to lower plasma cholesterol have been investigated. Absorption of cholesterol from the small intestine is another potential target. Compounds that inhibit cholesterol absorption may act by interacting stoichiometrically with cholesterol within the intestinal lumen or substoichiometrically, presumably within the enterocyte. Finally, the transcriptional regulation of cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase by members of the nuclear receptor superfamily provides at least two other molecular targets for cholesterol-lowering drugs.
94	NR	10769207	beta-catenin plays an integral role in cell-cell adhesion by linking the cadherin complex of the adherens junction to the underlying actin cytoskeleton. In addition, beta-catenin transduces intracellular signals within the Wnt developmental pathway that are crucial to the proper establishment of embryonic axes and pattern formation of early mesoderm and ectoderm. For example, in the context of a defined dorsal 'organizer' region of early Xenopus embryos, beta-catenin enters the nucleus and associates with transcription factors of the HMG (High Mobility Group) Lef/Tcf protein family. Consequently, genes such as siamois, a homeobox gene contributing to the specification of the dorsoanterior axis, are activated. To further examine the role that beta-catenin plays in Wnt signaling, we generated a chimeric protein, beta-Engrailed (beta-Eng), in which the C-terminal trans-activation domain of beta-catenin is replaced with the transcriptional repression domain of Drosophila Engrailed. Dorsal overexpression of this mRNA in early Xenopus embryos leads to suppression of organizer-specific molecular markers such as siamois, Xnr-3 and goosecoid, corresponding with the dramatic morphological ventralization of embryos. Ventralized embryos further exhibit reduced activity of the Wnt pathway, as indicated by the loss of the notochord/organizer marker, chordin. Importantly, beta-Eng associates and functions normally with the known components of the cadherin complex, providing the experimental opportunity to repress beta-catenin's signaling function apart from its role in cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion.
94	DR	10711719	The effects of 3, 3', 5-triiodothyronine (T3) on 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase activity were evaluated in the C100 baby hamster kidney cell line. Cells cultured in Minimal Essential Medium (MEM) were supplemented with 10% thyroid hormone-depleted fetal bovine serum (THDS-MEM) and had a 70.1% lower level of HMG-CoA reductase activity than the cells grown in a medium supplemented with fetal bovine serum (FBS). When T3 was added to THDS-MEM, the reduction of the reductase activity was blocked in a dose-dependent manner. In the cells grown in THDS-MEM for 48 hours, T3 (10(-6) M) treatment rapidly increased HMG-CoA reductase activity, achieving the control level six hours after treatment. Such effects of T3 were blocked by actinomycin D (5 microg/ml) or cycloheximide (10 microg/ml). The transcriptional rate of the HMG-CoA reductase gene did not change significantly regardless of the presence of T3, while T3 inhibited the 25-hydroxycholesterol-mediated decay of the reductase mRNA significantly. Our results show that T3-dependent regulation of HMG-CoA reductase activity, via the de novo synthesis of the reductase enzyme, seems to be mediated at least partially by the stabilization of HMG-CoA reductase mRNA.
94	NR	10692437	Here we characterize a novel murine nuclear protein, which we named NBP-45, that is related to the ubiquitous nuclear proteins HMG-14/-17, binds specifically to nucleosome core particles, and can function as a transcriptional activator. NBP-45 mRNA is expressed at low levels and in variable amounts in all mouse tissues tested but is especially abundant in RNA extracted from 7-day-old mouse embryos, suggesting that it functions in early embryonic development. NBP-45 is composed of 406 amino acids and is encoded by a single size transcript. The region spanning the N-terminal 85 amino acids contains three segments that are highly homologous to functionally important domains in the HMG-14/-17 protein family: the nuclear localization signal, the nucleosome binding domain, and the chromatin unfolding domain. The protein region spanning the C-terminal 321 amino acids has a 42% content of negatively charged residues. The first 23 amino acids contain a region necessary for nuclear entry of the protein, the region spanning residues 12-40 is the main nucleosomal binding domain of the protein, and the negatively charged, C-terminal domain is necessary for transcription activation. The functional domains of NBP-45 are indicative of a nuclear protein that binds to nucleosomes, thereby creating a chromatin region of high local negative charge. Our studies establish the nucleosomal binding domain as a protein motif that is present in other than just the ubiquitous HMG-14/-17 proteins. We suggest that the nucleosomal binding domain motif is a protein module that facilitates binding to nucleosomes in chromatin.
94	PR	10666309	The effects of acute treatment with fluvastatin, a hypocholesteremic drug, on the mRNA levels of several regulatory enzymes of cholesterogenesis and of the LDL receptor were determined in rat liver. Fluvastatin increased the hepatic mRNA levels for HMG-CoA reductase up to 12-fold in 5 weeks of treatment at a daily dose of 6. 3 mg/kg. The effect was less marked in cytosolic HMG-CoA synthase, farnesyl-PP synthase, squalene synthetase, and LDL receptor. SREBP-2 mRNA levels were also increased, but SREBP-1 were not. De novo synthesis of cholesterol in several cultured cells was reduced by increasing concentrations of fluvastatin, and the IC(50) values of fluvastatin in HepG2, CV-1, and CHO cells were respectively 0.01, 0. 05, and 0.1 microM. When CHO cells stably transfected with a chimeric gene composed of the promoter of cytosolic HMG-CoA synthase and the CAT gene as a reporter were incubated with fluvastatin, the CAT gene was overexpressed, an effect which was similar to the cotransfection with the processed form of SREBP-1a. Both ALLN and fluvastatin increased the transcriptional activity of cytosolic HMG-CoA synthase. Mutation in either SRE or NF-Y boxes abolished the increase in transcriptional rate caused by fluvastatin in the promoter of cytosolic HMG-CoA synthase. These results indicate that the increase in transcriptional activity in the HMG-CoA synthase gene attributable to fluvastatin is a consequence of the activation of the proteolytic cleavage of SREBPs by reduced levels of intracellular cholesterol. Copyright 2000 Academic Press.
94	NR	10625329	Development of myelinating glia and the myelination process both require dramatic changes in the pattern of gene expression. During these processes, cells of the oligodendrocyte and Schwann cell lineages have to alter the transcription rates of numerous genes in a highly coordinated manner. This is made possible by the combined action of a set of transcription factors with preferential expression in these cells. Recent years have seen the identification of such glial transcription factors, including several homeodomain proteins, zinc finger proteins and HMG-domain proteins. Understanding their mode of action will help to unravel the molecular basis of myelination and will provide insights into the causes of myelinopathies and related diseases. Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
94	NR	10553013	3-Thia fatty acids are modified fatty acids that promote hepatic peroxisome proliferation and decrease serum triacylglycerol, cholesterol and free fatty acid levels in rats. In vivo administration of tetradecylthioacetic acid (TTA) to rats led to a significant decrease in liver apolipoproteins apoA-I, A-II, A-IV, and C-III mRNA levels, and to an increase of liver acyl-CoA oxidase (ACO), carnitine palmitoyltransferase-II, and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A synthase (HMG-CoA synthase) mRNA levels and activities. By contrast, no significant changes of lipoprotein lipase (LPL) mRNA levels were detected in rat epididymal adipose tissue. Liver carnitine palmitoyltransferase-I, apoB, apoE, and LDL receptor mRNA levels were not significantly affected. When tested in vitro, TTA increased rat ACO and carnitine palmitoyltransferase-I mRNA levels in primary rat hepatocytes and also LPL mRNA levels in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes. TTA also enhanced the transcriptional activity of chimeras containing the DNA binding domain of the yeast transcription factor Gal4 fused to the ligand binding domain of either human PPARalpha or human PPARgamma. The effect depended on the concentration tested and the cell type.In conclusion, our data suggest that in vitro, TTA activates both PPARalpha and PPARgamma, but the latter with much lower affinity. TTA affects serum lipid levels in vivo in rats by acting mainly on the liver via PPARalpha where it decreases the liver expression of genes involved in vascular lipid transport and increases the expression of genes involved in intracellular fatty acid metabolism. -Raspe, E., L. Madsen, A-M. Lefebvre, I. Leitersdorf, L. Gelman, J. Peinado-Onsurbe, J. Dallongeville, J-C. Fruchart, R. Berge, and B. Staels. Modulation of rat liver apolipoprotein gene expression and serum lipid levels by tetradecylthioacetic acid (TTA) via PPARalpha activation.
94	NR	10583711	Hillebrant C-G, Nyberg B, Angelin B, Axelson M, Bjorkhem I, Rudling M, Einarsson C (Huddinge University Hospital and Karolinska Hospital, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden). Deoxycholic acid treatment in patients with cholesterol gallstones: failure to detect a suppression of cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase activity. J Intern Med 1999; 246: 399-407. OBJECTIVES: Based on animal studies, hydrophobic bile acids have been postulated to be particularly strong inhibitors of bile acid synthesis. The present study was undertaken to characterize in humans the effects of one of the most hydrophobic of the common bile acids, deoxycholic acid (DCA), on the transcriptional regulation and activity of the cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase, on hepatic cholesterol metabolism and on biliary lipid metabolism and plasma lipids. DESIGN, SUBJECTS AND SETTINGS: Thirteen patients with cholesterol gallstone disease were treated with DCA (750 mg day-1) for 3 weeks prior to cholecystectomy. Blood samples were collected before and during treatment. At operation, a liver biopsy and gallbladder bile were obtained. Twenty-eight untreated gallstone patients undergoing cholecystectomy served as controls. The study was carried out at a university hospital. RESULTS: Deoxycholic acid comprised 72 +/- 6% (mean +/- SEM) of total biliary bile acids in DCA-treated patients (n = 8), and 21 +/- 2% in the controls (n = 16; P < 0.001). Cholesterol saturation of gallbladder bile averaged 102% in both treated (n = 7) and untreated (n = 16) patients. Cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase and HMG CoA reductase activities and mRNA levels were not different between DCA-treated and untreated gallstone patients. The LDL receptor mRNA levels were similar in both groups of patients. Plasma levels of total cholesterol were lowered by 10% upon DCA treatment (P < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with DCA did not significantly affect mRNA levels and activity of hepatic cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase or HMG CoA reductase in patients with cholesterol gallstones. There was no effect on the saturation of gallbladder bile, Thus, the present study could not verify that the hydrophobicity of the bile acid pool is a major factor regulating human hepatic cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase activity.
94	PR	10549354	Wingless/Wnt signaling directs cell-fate choices during embryonic development. In Drosophila, Wingless signaling mediates endoderm induction and the establishment of segment polarity in the developing embryo. The fly Wingless cascade is strikingly similar to the vertebrate Wnt signaling pathway, which controls a number of key developmental decisions such as dorsal-ventral patterning in Xenopus. Factors of the TCF/LEF HMG domain family (Tcfs) have recently been established as the downstream effectors of the Wingless/Wnt signal transduction pathways. Upon Wingless/Wnt signaling, a cascade is initiated that results in the accumulation of cytoplasmic beta-catenin (or its fly homolog, Armadillo). There is also a concomitant translocation of beta-catenin/Armadillo to the nucleus, where it interacts with a specific sequence motif at the N terminus of Tcfs to generate a transcriptionally active complex. This bipartite transcription factor is targeted to the upstream regulatory regions of Tcf target genes including Siamois and Nodal related gene-3 in Xenopus, engrailed and Ultrabithorax in Drosophila via the sequence-specific HMG box, and mediates their transcriptional activation by virtue of transactivation domains contributed by beta-catenin/Armadillo. In the absence of Wingless/Wnt signals, a key negative regulator of the pathway, GSK3 beta, is activated, which mediates the downregulation of cytoplasmic beta-catenin/Armadillo via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. In the absence of nuclear beta-catenin, the Tcfs recruit the corepressor protein Groucho to the target gene enhancers and actively repress their transcription. An additional corepressor protein, CREB-binding protein (CBP), may also be involved in this repression of Tcf target gene activity. Several other proteins, including adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), GSK3 beta, and Axin/Conductin, are instrumental in the regulation of beta-catenin/Armadillo. In APC-deficient colon carcinoma cell lines, beta-catenin accumulates and is constitutively complexed with nuclear Tcf-4. A proportion of APC wild-type colon carcinomas and melanomas also contains constitutive nuclear Tcf-4/beta-catenin complexes as a result of dominant mutations in the N terminus of beta-catenin that render it insensitive to downregulation by APC, GSK3 beta, and Axin/Conductin. This results in the unregulated expression of Tcf-4 target genes such as c-myc. Based on the established role for Tcf-4 in maintaining intestinal stem cells it is likely that deregulation of c-myc expression as a result of constitutive Tcf-4/beta-catenin activity promotes uncontrolled intestinal cell proliferation. This would readily explain the formation of intestinal polyps during colon carcinogenesis. Similar mechanisms leading to deregulation of Tcf target gene activity are likely to be involved in melanoma and other forms of cancer.
94	NR	10473124	Group B Sox genes, Sox1, -2 and -3 are known to activate crystallin genes and to be involved in differentiation of lens and neural tissues. Screening of chicken genomic sequences for more Group B Sox genes identified two additional genes, Sox14 and Sox21. Proteins encoded by Sox14 and Sox21 genes are similar to each other but distinct from those coded by Sox1-3 (subgroup B1) except for the HMG domain and Group B homology immediately C-proximal of the HMG domain. C-terminal domains of SOX21 and SOX14 proteins function as strong and weak repression domains, respectively, when linked to the GAL4 DNA binding domain. These SOX proteins strongly (SOX21) or moderately (SOX14) inhibited activation of delta1-crystallin DC5 enhancer by SOX1 or SOX2, establishing that Sox14 and Sox21 are repressing subgroup (B2) of Group B Sox genes. This provides the first evidence for the occurrence of repressor SOX proteins. Activating (B1) and repressing (B2) subgroups of Group B Sox genes display interesting overlaps of expression domains in developing tissues (e.g. optic tectum, spinal cord, inner ear, alimentary tract, branchial arches). Within each subgroup, most expression domains of Sox1 and -3 are included in those of Sox2 (e.g. CNS, PNS, inner ear), while co-expression of Sox14 and Sox21 occurs in highly restricted sites of the CNS, with the likely temporal order of Sox21 preceding Sox14 (e.g. interneurons of the spinal cord). These expression patterns suggest that target genes of Group B SOX proteins are finely regulated by the counterbalance of activating and repressing SOX proteins.
94	NR	10460692	Pure and mixed isoprenoid end products of plant mevalonate metabolism trigger actions that suppress 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG CoA) reductase activity. These actions modulate HMG CoA reductase mRNA translation and the proteolytic degradation of HMG CoA reductase. Such post-transcriptional events, we propose, are activated directly by acyclic isoprenoids and indirectly by cyclic isoprenoids. Isoprenoids, acting secondarily to the dominant transcriptional effector of sterologenesis, modestly lower cholesterol levels, if and only if, sterologenesis is not repressed by a saturating imput of dietary cholesterol. An anomaly associated with tumor growth-a sterol feedback-resistant HMG CoA reductase activity-ensures a pool of sterologenic pathway intermediates. Such intermediates provide lipophilic anchors essential for membrane attachment and biological activity of growth hormone receptors, nuclear lamins A and B, and oncogenic ras. Tumor HMG CoA reductase retains high sensitivity to the isoprenoid-mediated secondary regulation. Repression of mevalonate synthesis by plant-derived isoprenoids reduces ras and lamin B processing, arrests cells in G1, and initiates cellular apoptosis. This unique tumor cell-specific sensitivity allows isoprenoids to be used for tumor therapy, an application emulating that of the statins, but one free of adverse effects. When evaluated at levels provided by a typical diet, isoprenoids individually have no impact on cholesterol synthesis and tumor growth. Nonetheless, isoprenoid-mediated activities are additive, and, sometimes synergistic. Therefore, the combined actions of the estimated 23,000 isoprenoid constituents of plant materials, acting in concert with other chemopreventive phytochemicals, may explain the lowered cancer risk associated with a diet rich in plant products. In contrast, that lowering of cancer risk does not correspond to supplemental intake of other dietary factors associated with fruits, vegetables, and cereal grains, namely fiber, beta-carotene, vitamin C, and vitamin E, and only weakly to supplemental folate.
94	PR	10375506	XTcf-3 is an HMG box transcription factor that mediates Xenopus dorsal-ventral axis formation. As a Wnt pathway effector, XTcf-3 interacts with beta-catenin and activates the expression of the dorsal organizing gene siamois, while in the absence of beta-catenin, XTcf-3 functions as a transcriptional repressor. We show that XTcf-3 contains amino- and carboxy-terminal repressor domains and have identified a Xenopus member of the C-terminal Binding Protein family of transcriptional co-repressors (XCtBP) as the C-terminal co-repressor. We show that two XCtBP binding sites near the XTcf-3 carboxy-terminus are required for the interaction of XTcf-3 and XCtBP and for the transcriptional repression mediated by the XTcf-3 carboxy-terminal domain. By fusing the GAL4 activation domain to XCtBP we have generated an antimorphic protein, XCtBP/G4A, that activates siamois transcription through an interaction with endogenous XTcf-3. Ectopic expression of XCtBP/G4A demonstrates that XCtBP functions in the regulation of head and notochord development. Our data support a role for XCtBP as a co-repressor throughout Xenopus development and indicate that XCtBP/G4A will be a useful tool in determining how XCtBP functions in various developmental processes.
94	PR	10358756	The development and function of T lymphocytes are regulated tightly by signal transduction pathways that include specific cell-surface receptors, intracellular signaling molecules, and nuclear transcription factors. Since 1988, several families of functionally important T cell transcription factors have been identified. These include the Ikaros, LKLF, and GATA3 zinc-finger proteins; the Ets, CREB/ATF, and NF-kappa B/Rel/NFAT transcription factors; the Stat proteins; and HMG box transcription factors such as LEF1, TCF1, and Sox4. In this review, we summarize our current understanding of the transcriptional regulation of T cell development and function with particular emphasis on the results of recent gene targeting and transgenic experiments. In addition to increasing our understanding of the molecular pathways that regulate T cell development and function, these results have suggested novel targets for genetic and pharmacological manipulation of T cell immunity.
94	DR	10357819	Transcriptional activation of the virus inducible enhancer of the human interferon-beta (IFN-beta) gene in response to virus infection requires the assembly of an enhanceosome, consisting of the transcriptional activators NF-kappaB, ATF-2/c-Jun, IRFs and the architectural protein of the mammalian high mobility group I(Y) [HMG I(Y)]. Here, we demonstrate that the first step in enhanceosome assembly, i.e. HMG I(Y)-dependent recruitment of NF-kappaB and ATF-2/c-Jun to the enhancer, is facilitated by discrete regions of HMG I and is mediated by allosteric changes induced in the DNA by HMG I(Y) and not by protein-protein interactions between HMG I(Y) and these proteins. However, we show that completion of the enhanceosome assembly process requires protein-protein interactions between HMG I(Y) and the activators. Finally, we demonstrate that once assembled, the IFN-beta enhanceosome is an unusually stable nucleoprotein structure that can activate transcription at high levels by promoting multiple rounds of reinitiation of transcription.
94	NR	10343288	The mammalian testis-determining gene Sry and the related Sox genes define a family of transcriptional regulators widely expressed during embryogenesis. Tightly controlled temporal profiles of expression are a feature of the Sox gene family and may be required for initiation of a cascade of gene expression, yet the molecular mechanisms that control Sox gene expression are unknown. We now show that human SOX4 is expressed in the normal breast and in breast cancer cells. In these cells SOX4 is a progesterone-regulated gene, the expression of which is increased by progestins, leading to a marked increase in SOX-mediated transcriptional activity. Treatment of T-47D breast cancer cells with the synthetic progestin ORG 2058 directly increased SOX4 transcription, resulting in a 4-fold increase in SOX4 mRNA levels within 4 h of treatment. No effect of ORG 2058 was noted on other SOX genes measured, nor were other hormone-regulated HMG box proteins detected in this system, suggesting that the observed ability of progestin to increase SOX mRNA expression was confined to SOX4. The increase in SOX4 transcription was reflected in increased SOX4 protein expression, as progestin treatment of T-47D cells transfected with a SOX-responsive reporter resulted in a marked increase in reporter gene expression. Progesterone is essential for normal development and differentiation of the female reproductive system, plays an essential role in regulating growth and differentiation of the mammary gland and is required for opposing the proliferative effects of estrogen in specific cell types. The detection of SOX4 expression in the normal and malignant breast and the demonstration that SOX4 expression is under progesterone control suggests that changes in SOX4 gene expression may play a role in commitment to the differentiated phenotype in the normal and malignant mammary gland.
94	NR	10318878	Ying Yang 1 (YY1) is shown to bind to the proximal promoters of the genes encoding 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) synthase, farnesyl diphosphate (FPP) synthase, and the low density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor. To investigate the potential effect of YY1 on the expression of SREBP-responsive genes, HepG2 cells were transiently transfected with luciferase reporter constructs under the control of promoters derived from either HMG-CoA synthase, FPP synthase, or the LDL receptor genes. The luciferase activity of each construct increased when HepG2 cells were incubated in lipid-depleted media or when the cells were cotransfected with a plasmid encoding mature sterol regulatory element-binding protein (SREBP)-1a. In each case, the increase in luciferase activity was attenuated by coexpression of wild-type YY1 but not by coexpression of mutant YY1 proteins that are known to be defective in either DNA binding or in modulating transcription of other known YY1-responsive genes. In contrast, incubation of cells in lipid-depleted media resulted in induction of an HMG-CoA reductase promoter-luciferase construct by a process that was unaffected by coexpression of wild-type YY1. Electromobility shift assays were used to demonstrate that the proximal promoters of the HMG-CoA synthase, FPP synthase, and the LDL receptor contain YY1 binding sites and that YY1 displaced nuclear factor Y from the promoter of the HMG-CoA synthase gene. We conclude that YY1 inhibits the transcription of specific SREBP-dependent genes and that, in the case of the HMG-CoA synthase gene, this involves displacement of nuclear factor Y from the promoter. We hypothesize that YY1 plays a regulatory role in the transcriptional regulation of specific SREBP-responsive genes.
94	NR	10196467	The chromosomal high-mobility-group (HMG) proteins of the HMGI/Y family interact with A/T-rich stretches in duplex DNA, and are considered assistant factors in transcriptional regulation. A cDNA encoding an HMGI/Y protein of 190 amino acid residues was isolated from maize and characterized. Like other plant HMGI/Y proteins, the maize HMGI/Y protein contains four copies of the AT-hook DNA-binding motif and an amino-terminal 'histone H1-like region' with a similarity to the globular domain of H1. The maize hmgi/y gene that was isolated from a genomic DNA library contains a single intron that is localized in the region of sequence similarity to histone H1. Interestingly, the genes encoding plant H1 contain an intron at exactly the same relative position, indicating an evolutionary relationship of the plant genes encoding HMGI/Y and H1 proteins.
94	NR	10090829	BACKGROUND. E-selectin transcription requires binding of transcription factors, NF-kappaB, ATF-2, and HMG-I(Y). Here we characterize the mechanism responsible for the transcriptional downregulation of E-selectin expression. MATERIALS AND METHODS. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were treated with TNF-alpha for 24 h. HUVEC E-selectin expression was measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, Northern blotting, and nuclear run-on assays, and NF-kappa B was assessed by electrophoretic gel mobility shift assays (EMSAs). RESULTS. (1) E-selectin surface expression peaked at 4 h and then diminished over the next 20 h. (2) Transcription of E-selectin began within 1 h of TNF-alpha exposure and ceased by 8 h, despite continuous stimulation of HUVECs with TNF-alpha. (3) EMSAs revealed persistent binding activity of NF-kappa B proteins to two NF-kappa B-binding sites during 24 h of continuous stimulation with TNF-alpha. However, binding activity of proteins that recognize a third NF-kappa B element, -126 to -116 bp from the transcription start site, was lost after 4 h during 24 h of continuous stimulation with TNF-alpha; ATF-2 binding was unchanged over 24 h stimulation with TNF-alpha. CONCLUSION. The termination of E-selectin expression is controlled at the level of transcription, with loss of protein-DNA interactions at only one of three NF-kappa B-binding sites in the E-selectin promoter. Copyright 1999 Academic Press.
94	NR	10082553	Human rRNA synthesis by RNA polymerase I requires at least two auxiliary factors, upstream binding factor (UBF) and SL1. UBF is a DNA binding protein with multiple HMG domains that binds directly to the CORE and UCE elements of the ribosomal DNA promoter. The carboxy-terminal region of UBF is necessary for transcription activation and has been shown to be extensively phosphorylated. SL1, which consists of TATA-binding protein (TBP) and three associated factors (TAFIs), does not have any sequence-specific DNA binding activity, and its recruitment to the promoter is mediated by specific protein interactions with UBF. Once on the promoter, the SL1 complex makes direct contact with the DNA promoter and directs promoter-specific initiation of transcription. To investigate the mechanism of UBF-dependent transcriptional activation, we first performed protein-protein interaction assays between SL1 and a series of UBF deletion mutants. This analysis indicated that the carboxy-terminal domain of UBF, which is necessary for transcriptional activation, makes direct contact with the TBP-TAFI complex SL1. Since this region of UBF can be phosphorylated, we then tested whether this modification plays a functional role in the interaction with SL1. Alkaline phosphatase treatment of UBF completely abolished the ability of UBF to interact with SL1; moreover, incubation of the dephosphorylated UBF with nuclear extracts from exponentially growing cells was able to restore the UBF-SL1 interaction. In addition, DNase I footprinting analysis and in vitro-reconstituted transcription assays with phosphatase-treated UBF provided further evidence that UBF phosphorylation plays a critical role in the regulation of the recruitment of SL1 to the ribosomal DNA promoter and stimulation of UBF-dependent transcription.
94	NR	10082527	Two coordinate forms of transcriptional synergy mediate eukaryotic gene regulation: the greater-than-additive transcriptional response to multiple promoter-bound activators, and the sigmoidal response to increasing activator concentration. The mechanism underlying the sigmoidal response has not been elucidated but is almost certainly founded on the cooperative binding of activators and the general machinery to DNA. Here we explore that mechanism by using highly purified transcription factor preparations and a strong Epstein-Barr virus promoter, BHLF-1, regulated by the virally encoded activator ZEBRA. We demonstrate that two layers of cooperative binding govern transcription complex assembly. First, the architectural proteins HMG-1 and -2 mediate cooperative formation of an enhanceosome containing ZEBRA and cellular Sp1. This enhanceosome then recruits transcription factor IIA (TFIIA) and TFIID to the promoter to form the DA complex. The DA complex, however, stimulates assembly of the enhanceosome itself such that the entire reaction can occur in a highly concerted manner. The data reveal the importance of reciprocal cooperative interactions among activators and the general machinery in eukaryotic gene regulation.
94	PR	10051425	Cytosolic and mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) synthases were first recognized as different chemical entities in 1975, when they were purified and characterized by Lane's group. Since then, the two enzymes have been studied extensively, one as a control site of the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway and the other as an important control site of ketogenesis. This review describes some key developments over the last 25 years that have led to our current understanding of the physiology of mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase in the HMG-CoA pathway and in ketogenesis in the liver and small intestine of suckling animals. The enzyme is regulated by two systems: succinylation and desuccinylation in the short term, and transcriptional regulation in the long term. Both control mechanisms are influenced by nutritional and hormonal factors, which explains the incidence of ketogenesis in diabetes and starvation, during intense lipolysis, and in the foetal-neonatal and suckling-weaning transitions. The DNA-binding properties of the peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor and other transcription factors on the nuclear-receptor-responsive element of the mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase promoter have revealed how ketogenesis can be regulated by fatty acids. Finally, the expression of mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase in the gonads and the correction of auxotrophy for mevalonate in cells deficient in cytosolic HMG-CoA synthase suggest that the mitochondrial enzyme may play a role in cholesterogenesis in gonadal and other tissues.
94	NR	9925951	SOX genes comprise a family of genes that are related to the mammalian sex determining gene SRY in the region that encodes the HMG-box domain responsible for the sequence-specific DNA-binding activity. SOX genes encode putative transcriptional regulators implicated in the decision of cell fates during development and the control of diverse developmental processes. We have cloned and characterised SOX14, a novel member of the human SOX gene family. Based on the HMG-box sequence, human SOX14 is a member of the B subfamily. SOX14 is expressed in human foetal brain, spinal cord and thymus, and like other members of the B subfamily, it might have a role in regulation of nervous system development. While other members of the B subfamily show similarity outside the HMG-box, the regions flanking the HMG box of the human SOX14 gene are unique. SOX14 has been mapped to human chromosome 3q22--> q23, close to the marker D3S1549. This location places SOX14 within a chromosome interval associated with two distinct syndromes that affect craniofacial development: Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicantus inversus syndrome and Mobius syndrome.
94	DR	9893938	Mitochondrial and cytosolic HMG-CoA synthases are encoded by two different genes. Control of ketogenesis is exerted by transcriptional regulation of mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase. Fasting, cAMP, and fatty acids increase its transcriptional rate, while refeeding and insulin repress it. Fatty acids increase transcription through peroxisomal proliferator regulatory element (PPRE), to which peroxisome proliferator activated receptor (PPAR) can bind. Other transcription factors such as chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor (COUP-TF) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF-4) compete for the PPRE site, modulating the response of PPAR.
94	NR	9883584	DSP1 is an HMG-box containing protein of Drosophila melanogaster which was first identified as a co-repressor of the Dorsal protein. Recently, the analysis of the structure of the gene has led us to propose that DSP1 is the Drosophila equivalent of the ubiquitous vertebrate HMG 1/2 proteins. In the present paper, the patterns of expression of DSP1 protein and RNA in adult flies and during development are reported. In the adults DSP1 protein is located in nurse cells of ovaries and in brain. During eggs development uniform expression of DSP1 protein persists until the end of germband retraction. At later stages, expression is restricted to the ventral nerve chord and brain. Using P-element mutagenesis, we have isolated a mutant deficient in DSP1 functions. Genetic studies of this mutant show that DSP1 protein is essential for the growth and the development of Drosophila. In addition to be a co-repressor of the transcriptional activator Dorsal our results provide compelling evidence that DSP1 is a regulator involved in several pathways necessary for the development of the fly.
94	DR	9880529	Nonhistone chromosomal proteins of the high mobility group (HMG) affect the transcriptional regulation of certain mammalian genes. For example, HMG-I(Y) controls cytokine-mediated promoters that require transcription factors, such as nuclear factor-kappaB, for maximal expression. Even though a great deal is known about how HMG-I(Y) facilitates expression of other genes, less is known about the regulation of HMG-I(Y) itself, especially in cells in primary culture. Therefore we investigated the effect of endotoxin and the cytokine interleukin-1beta on HMG-I(Y) expression in vascular smooth muscle cells. Induction of HMG-I(Y) peaked after 48 h of interleukin-1beta stimulation (6.2-fold) in cells in primary culture, and this increase in mRNA corresponded to an increase in HMG-I(Y) protein. Moreover, immunohistochemical staining revealed a dramatic increase in HMG-I(Y) protein expression in vascular smooth muscle cells after endotoxin stimulation in vivo. This increase in HMG-I(Y) expression (both in vitro and in vivo) mirrored an up-regulation of inducible nitric oxide synthase, a cytokine-responsive gene. The functional significance of this coinduction is underscored by our finding that HMG-I(Y) potentiated the response of inducible nitric oxide synthase to nuclear factor-kappaB transactivation. Taken together, these studies suggest that induction of HMG-I(Y), and subsequent transactivation of iNOS, may contribute to a reduction in vascular tone during endotoxemia and other systemic inflammatory processes.
94	NR	9872947	Ankyrin (ANK) repeats were first found in the Swi6 transcription factor of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and since then were identified in many proteins of eukaryotes and prokaryotes. These repeats are thought to serve as protein association domains. In Swi6, ANK repeats affect DNA binding of both the Swi4/Swi6 and Mbp1/Swi6 complexes. We have previously described generation of random mutations within the ANK repeats of Swi6 that render the protein temperature sensitive in its ability to activate HO transcription. Two of these SWI6 mutants were used in a screen for high copy suppressors of this phenotype. We found that MSN1, which encodes a transcriptional activator, and NHP6A, which encodes an HMG-like protein, are able to suppress defective Swi6 function. Both of these gene products are involved in HO transcription, and Nhp6A may also be involved in CLN1 transcription. Moreover, because overexpression of NHP6A can suppress caffeine sensitivity of one of the SWI6 ANK mutants, swi6-405, other SWI6-dependent genes may also be affected by Nhp6A. We hypothesize that Nhp6A and Msn1 modulate Swi6-dependent gene transcription indirectly, through effects on chromatin structure or other transcription factors, because we have not been able to demonstrate that either Msn1 or Nhp6A interact with the Swi4/Swi6 complex.
94	NR	9869647	The activity of HMG-CoA reductase (HMGR) is tightly regulated, in part through post-transcriptional mechanisms that are mediated by nonsterol products of mevalonate metabolism. Previous reports have suggested that these mediators are derived from farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP). Recent studies have implicated FPP hydrolysis products (e.g., farnesol), the squalene synthetase (SQS) reaction products presqualene pyrophosphate (PSQPP) and squalene, or their metabolites. To distinguish among these possible mediators, we evaluated the ability of HMGR and SQS inhibitors to induce compensatory increases in HMGR activity in cultured IM-9 cells. Mevinolin (HMGR inhibitor) produced predicted increases in HMGR activity that were related to the degree of cholesterolgenesis inhibition (e.g., 4-fold, 9-fold, and 17-fold increases relative to 50%, 76%, and 90% inhibition, respectively). By contrast, a variety of structurally distinct reversible, competitive, first half-reaction SQS inhibitors all reduced cholesterolgenesis by up to 90% with no appreciable increases in HMGR activity.These observations strongly suggest that nonsterol-mediated post-transcriptional mechanisms regulating HMGR activity remain intact after SQS first half-reaction inhibition, indicating that nonsterol regulator production is independent of SQS action and ruling out PSQPP, squalene and their metabolites as possible mediators. Unexpectedly, the SQS mechanism-based irreversible inactivator, zaragozic acid A (ZGA) exhibited the greatest degree of HMGR modulation, producing 5-fold, 11-fold, and 40-fold increases in HMGR activity at concentrations that produced 25%, 50%, and 75% cholesterolgenesis inhibition, respectively. The markedly greater magnitude of HMGR stimulation by ZGA versus mevinolin at similar levels of cholesterolgenesis inhibition suggests that ZGA may directly interfere with the production or action of the nonsterol regulator.
94	NR	9855111	Sterol regulatory element-binding proteins (SREBPs) regulate transcription of genes encoding enzymes in the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway and the LDL receptor. These proteins are synthesized as membrane-bound precursors and processed to generate the NH2-terminal domains, mature transcription factors. We established two Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell lines, CHO-421 expressing the truncated hamster SREBP-1 (amino acids 421-1133) with two transmenbrane domains and CHO-557 expressing another truncated SREBP-1 (amino acids 557-1133) without any transmembrane domains, to investigate the fate of the COOH terminus after cleavage of the NH2-terminal mature SREBP. The cell fractionation experiments revealed that the two proteins, regardless of the absence of transmembrane domains in the SREBP (557-1133), similarly localized in the nuclear envelope and the microsomal membrane fractions, suggesting that these proteins appear to be tightly bound to a membrane protein(s) localizing on the nuclear and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membranes. Although we predicted that overexpression of the COOH-terminal domains, which were thought to be involved in the regulation of SREBP processing, would result in disruption of the SREBP-dependent transcriptional regulation of several genes, the mRNA levels for 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG CoA) synthase in these two cell lines were regulated in a sterol-dependent manner. Pulse-chase experiments revealed that the SREBP (421-1133) was relatively rapidly degraded (t1/2 = 4-6 hr) and that the intracellular cholesterol level did not affect the half-life time. The degradation of the SREBP (421-1133) was not suppressed by the treatment of a calpain inhibitor, N-acetyl-leucyl-leucyl-norleucynal (ALLN), which blocks the proteolysis of some proteins within or near the ER. In CHO-557 cells the SREBP (557-1133) was much more rapidly degraded (t1/2 = 1-2 hr), suggesting that the cytosolic COOH-terminal domain is accessible to the enzymatic attacks from the cytoplasm. Taken together, overexpression of the COOH-terminal domains does not affect the regulation of SREBP processing and the domains are rapidly turned over by the cytosolic proteolytic process distinct from the ALLN-sensitive ER degradative pathway.
94	NR	9843503	Mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase (mHMG-CoAS) is a key enzyme in ketogenesis, catalyzing the condensation of acetyl-CoA and acetoacetyl-CoA to generate HMG-CoA, which is eventually converted to ketone bodies. Transcription of the nuclear-encoded gene for mHMG-CoAS is stimulated by peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) alpha, a fatty acid-activated nuclear hormone receptor. Here we show that the mHMG-CoAS protein physically interacts with PPARalpha in vitro, and potentiates PPARalpha-dependent transcriptional activation via the cognate PPAR response element of the mHMG-CoAS gene in vivo. Immunofluorescence of transiently transfected cells demonstrated that in the presence of PPARalpha, mHMG-CoAS is translocated into the nucleus. Binding to PPARalpha, stimulation of PPARalpha activity and nuclear penetration require the integrity of the sequence LXXLL in mHMG-CoAS, a motif known to mediate the interaction between nuclear hormone receptors and coactivators. These findings reveal a novel mechanism of gene regulation whereby the product of a PPARalpha-responsive gene, normally resident in the mitochondria, directly interacts with this nuclear hormone receptor to autoregulate its own nuclear transcription.
94	NR	9819418	Cell type control of meiotic gene regulation in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is mediated by a cascade of transcriptional repressors, a1-alpha2 and Rme1. Here, we investigate the analogous regulatory pathway in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe by analyzing the promoter of mei3, the single gene whose expression is sufficient to trigger meiosis. The mei3 promoter does not appear to contain a negative regulatory element that represses transcription in haploid cells. Instead, correct regulation of mei3 transcription depends on a complex promoter that contains at least five positive elements upstream of the TATA sequence. These elements synergistically activate mei3 transcription, thereby constituting an on-off switch for the meiosis pathway. Element C is a large region containing multiple sequences that resemble binding sites for Mc, an HMG domain protein encoded by the mating-type locus. The function of element C is extremely sensitive to spacing changes but not to linker-scanning mutations, suggesting the possibility that Mc functions as an architectural transcription factor. Altered-specificity experiments indicate that element D interacts with Pm, a homeodomain protein encoded by the mating-type locus. This indicates that Pm functions as a direct activator of the meiosis pathway, whereas the homologous mating-type protein in S. cerevisiae (alpha2) functions as a repressor. Thus, despite the strong similarities between the mating-type loci of S. cerevisiae and S. pombe, the regulatory logic that governs the tight control of the key meiosis-inducing genes in these organisms is completely different.
94	PR	9809067	The transcriptional coactivators CBP and P/CAF are required for activation of transcription from the IFN beta enhanceosome. We show that CBP and P/CAF acetylate HMG I(Y), the essential architectural component required for enhanceosome assembly, at distinct lysine residues, causing distinct effects on transcription. Thus, in the context of the enhanceosome, acetylation of HMG I by CBP, but not by P/CAF, leads to enhanceosome destabilization and disassembly. We demonstrate that acetylation of HMG I(Y) by CBP is essential for turning off IFN beta gene expression. Finally, we show that the acetyltransferase activities of CBP and P/CAF modulate both the strength of the transcriptional response and the kinetics of virus-dependent activation of the IFN beta gene.
94	NR	9786416	We have recently demonstrated that the retinoblastoma family of negative cell cycle regulators can form complexes with a class of developmental factors which contain paired-like (PL) homeodomains (Wiggan et al. [1998] Oncogene 16:227-236). Our screens led to the isolation of a novel PL-homeodomain protein which had been isolated independently by another group and called Alx-4 (Qu et al. [1997] Development 124:3999-4008). Mice homozygous for a targeted null mutation of Alx-4 have several abnormalities, including preaxial polydactyly, suggesting that Alx-4 plays a role in pattern formation in limb buds. In data that we present here, we show that Alx-4 is expressed in mesenchymal condensations of a diverse group of tissues whose development is dependent on epithelial-mesenchymal interactions, many of which are additionally dependent on expression of the HMG-box-containing protein, LEF-1. Alx-4-expressing tissues include osteoblast precursors of most bones, the dermal papilla of hair and whisker follicles, the dental papilla of teeth, and a subset of mesenchymal cells in pubescent mammary glands. We show further that Alx-4 strongly activates transcription from a promoter containing the homeodomain binding site, P2. Optimal activation requires specific sequences in the N-terminal portion of Alx-4 as well as a proline-rich region downstream of the PL-homeodomain, but not the paired-tail at the C terminus. Taken together, our results demonstrate that Alx-4 is a potent transcriptional activator that is expressed at sites of epithelial-mesenchymal interactions during murine embryonic development.
94	PR	9740330	Embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells are used widely as a model system for studying the expression of developmentally regulated genes, in particular genes that are regulated at the transcriptional level when EC cells differentiate. This review focuses on the molecular mechanisms that govern the transcription of the fibroblast growth factor-4 (FGF-4) gene, which appears to be the first FGF expressed during mammalian development. Interest in this gene has increased considerably with the finding that FGF-4 is essential for mammalian embryogenesis. The FGF-4 gene has also generated considerable interest because it is inhibited at the transcriptional level when EC cells undergo differentiation and because this gene is regulated by a powerful distal enhancer located 3 kb downstream of the transcription start site in the last exon of the gene. Hence, study of the FGF-4 gene is likely to shed light on the molecular mechanisms by which distal enhancers regulate gene expression. In addition to being regulated by the downstream enhancer, the expression of this gene is influenced by a regulatory region located just upstream of the transcription start site, which contains two Sp1 motifs and a CCAAT box motif. Examination of the downstream enhancer has identified three functional cis-regulatory elements: a high mobility group (HMG) protein binding motif, an octamer binding motif, and an Sp1 motif, which are likely to bind Sox-2, Oct-3, and Sp1/Sp3, respectively, in vivo. Interestingly, Sox-2 and Oct-3 expression, like FGF-4 expression, decreases when EC cells differentiate, which suggests that the loss of these transcription factors is responsible, at least in part, for the transcriptional turn-off of the FGF-4 gene. In view of these and other findings, we present a model for the differential expression of the FGF-4 gene that includes not only the contributions of specific transcription factors, but also the contribution of chromatin structure before and after differentiation.
94	NR	9727051	The mechanism by which 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl (HMG)-CoA reductase inhibitors increase endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) expression is unknown. To determine whether changes in isoprenoid synthesis affects eNOS expression, human endothelial cells were treated with the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor, mevastatin (1-10 microM), in the presence of L-mevalonate (200 microM), geranylgeranylpyrophosphate (GGPP, 1-10 microM), farnesylpyrophosphate (FPP, 5-10 microM), or low density lipoprotein (LDL, 1 mg/ml). Mevastatin increased eNOS mRNA and protein levels by 305 +/- 15% and 180 +/- 11%, respectively. Co-treatment with L-mevalonate or GGPP, but not FPP or LDL, reversed mevastatin's effects. Because Rho GTPases undergo geranylgeranyl modification, we investigated whether Rho regulates eNOS expression. Immunoblot analyses and [35S]GTPgammaS-binding assays revealed that mevastatin inhibited Rho membrane translocation and GTP binding activity by 60 +/- 5% and 78 +/- 6%, both of which were reversed by co-treatment with GGPP but not FPP. Furthermore, inhibition of Rho by Clostridium botulinum C3 transferase (50 microg/ml) or by overexpression of a dominant-negative N19RhoA mutant increased eNOS expression. In contrast, activation of Rho by Escherichia coli cytotoxic necrotizing factor-1 (200 ng/ml) decreased eNOS expression. These findings indicate that Rho negatively regulates eNOS expression and that HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors up-regulate eNOS expression by blocking Rho geranylgeranylation, which is necessary for its membrane-associated activity.
94	NR	9708898	5-Amino-4-imidazolecarboxamide riboside (AICAR) is known to stimulate rat liver 5'-AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK). AMPK is the mammalian homologue of Snf1p in yeast, involved in derepression of glucose-repressed genes. We used AICAR to test if AMPK could also play a role in the regulation of glucose-dependent genes in mammalian cells. At a concentration which induces phosphorylation-dependent inactivation of HMG-CoA reductase, AICAR blocked glucose activation of three glucose responsive genes, namely L-type pyruvate kinase (L-PK), Spot 14 and fatty acid synthase genes in primary cultured hepatocytes, but was without any action on glucose phosphorylation to glucose 6-phosphate and on expression of PEPCK, albumin and beta-actin genes. AICAR was also found to inhibit activation of the L-PK gene promoter by glucose in transiently transfected hepatoma cells. Therefore our results suggest that AMPK is probably involved in the glucose signal pathway regulating gene expression in the liver.
94	NR	9659924	Transcriptional activation of the IFN beta gene in response to virus infection requires the assembly of an enhanceosome, consisting of the transcriptional activators NF-kappa B, IRF1, ATF2/c-Jun, and the architectural protein HMG I(Y). The level of transcription generated by all of these activators is greater than the sum of the levels generated by individual factors, a phenomenon designated transcriptional synergy. We demonstrate that this synergy, in the context of the enhanceosome, requires a new protein-protein interaction domain in the p65 subunit of NF-kappa B. Transcriptional synergy requires recruitment of the CBP/p300 coactivator to the enhanceosome, via a new activating surface assembled from the novel p65 domain and the activation domains of all of the activators. Deletion, substitution, or rearrangement of any one of the activation domains in the context of the enhanceosome decreases both recruitment of CBP and transcriptional synergy.
94	NR	9659909	A functional interferon-beta gene enhanceosome was assembled in vitro using the purified recombinant transcriptional activator proteins ATF2/c-JUN, IRF1, and p50/p65 of NF-kappa B. Maximal levels of transcriptional synergy between these activators required the specific interactions with the architectural protein HMG I(Y) and the correct helical phasing of the binding sites of these proteins on the DNA helix. Analyses of the in vitro assembled enhanceosome revealed that the transcriptional synergy is due, at least in part, to the cooperative assembly and stability of the complex. Reconstitution experiments showed that the formation of a stable enhanceosome-dependent preinitiation complex require cooperative interactions between the enhanceosome; the general transcription factors TFID, TFIIA, and TFIIB; and the cofactor USA. These studies provide a direct biochemical demonstration of the importance of the structure and function of natural multicomponent transcriptional enhancer complexes in gene regulation.
94	NR	9651391	Cells were transfected with luciferase reporter genes, under the control of promoters derived from either the farnesyl diphosphate (FPP) synthase, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) synthase, HMG-CoA reductase, or low density lipoprotein receptor genes. The increase in luciferase activity that occurred when cells were either incubated in sterol-depleted medium or cotransfected with a cDNA encoding sterol regulatory element-binding protein (SREBP)-1a was prevented by coexpression of wild-type E1A or a Gal4-CBP (1-451) fusion protein. The inhibitory effect of E1A was overcome by coexpression of CBP. The increase in reporter gene activity noted above was not affected when the cells were cotransfected with cDNAs that encoded either a mutant E1A that is unable to interact with the transcriptional activator CBP or Gal4-CBP fusion proteins encoding separate fragments of CBP, which span the remainder of the CBP molecule. A preformed SREBP-1a:[32P]DNA complex bound specifically to membrane-immobilized GST-CBP fusion proteins that contained amino-terminal portions of CBP. In order to investigate the role of CBP in the regulation of endogenous genes, we isolated stable transformants that express Gal4-CBP(1-451) in response to added doxycycline. Induction of endogenous FPP synthase and HMG-CoA synthase mRNAs, in response to cellular cholesterol depletion, was prevented when cells expressed Gal4-CBP(1-451). We conclude that when cells are incubated in the absence of sterols, the transcriptional activation of the HMG-CoA synthase, HMG-CoA reductase, FPP synthase, and low density lipoprotein receptor genes is dependent on a specific interaction between SREBP, which is bound to the promoter DNA, and the amino-terminal domain (amino acids 1-451) of CBP.
94	NR	9602142	We isolated a cDNA clone encoding a novel SRY-type HMG box (Sox) protein, designated Sox24, from a rainbow trout ovary cDNA library. On the basis of the HMG box amino acid sequence, Sox24 can be categorized into the same subgroup of Sox proteins as SOX4, SOX11, and SOX22. The proteins in this group also share a highly conserved sequence at the C-terminus. The Sox24 mRNA is expressed at high levels in the ovary, and in-situ hybridization localized its expression to oocytes. The recombinant protein containing the Sox24 HMG box region bound to an AACAAT sequence strongly in a gel retardation assay. Upon co-transfection into CHO cells, the full-length Sox24 transactivated transcription from a reporter plasmid through the AACAAT binding motif. We used GAL4/Sox24 chimeras with the DNA binding domain of yeast GAL4 at the N-terminus to map the transactivation function to the C-terminal region, which included the conserved sequence. These results suggest that Sox24 plays a role as a transcriptional regulator during oogenesis.
94	NR	9622621	In this study we investigate the gene regulatory functions of Drosophila Fish-hook (Fish), a high mobility group (HMG) Sox protein that is essential for embryonic segmentation. We show that the Fish HMG domain binds to the vertebrate Sox protein consensus DNA binding sites, AACAAT and AACAAAG, and that this binding induces an 85 degrees DNA bend. In addition, we use a heterologous yeast system to show that the NH2-terminal portion of Fish protein can function as a transcriptional activator. Fish directly regulates the expression of the pair rule gene, even-skipped (eve), by binding to multiple sites located in downstream regulatory regions that direct formation of eve stripes 1, 4, 5, and 6. Fish may function along with the Drosophila POU domain proteins Pdm-1 and Pdm-2 to regulate eve transcription, as genetic interactions were detected between fish and pdm mutants. Finally, we determined that Fish protein is expressed in a dynamic pattern throughout embryogenesis, and is present in nuclear and cytoplasmic compartments. Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
94	DR	9604010	The expression of the human SREBP-2 gene is transcriptionally regulated in a cooperative manner by sterol regulatory element-binding proteins (SREBPs) and the general transcription factor NF-Y [Sato, R., Inoue, J., Kawabe, Y., Kodama, T., Takano, T., and Maeda, M. (1996) J. Biol. Chem. 271, 26461-26464]. To understand the sterol-dependent transcriptional regulation by these factors in detail, we have examined the regulation of the 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG CoA) synthase and squalene synthase genes, whose promoters have multiple potential sterol regulatory elements (SRE, SREBP binding site) and NF-Y binding sites. The promoter of the human HMG CoA synthase gene was cloned, sequenced, and functionally characterized by means of reporter gene assays. The results indicate that an inverted CCAAT box, two SRE motifs and two Sp1 sites localized in a 90-bp region coordinately regulate the transcription. In the case of the human squalene synthase promoter, two SRE motifs and an inverted CCAAT box between the motifs localized in a 51-bp region are responsible for the sterol-regulated transcription of the gene. Gel mobility shift assay reveals that these two inverted CCAAT boxes are recognized by NF-Y. The involvement of multiple responsive elements in the transcription of HMG CoA synthase and squalene synthase seems to induce a higher level of sterol-dependent regulation (3.5 to 5. 8-fold) compared with that of the SREBP-2 promoter, which contains a single pair of SRE motif and CCAAT box (1.8 to 2.6-fold). Reporter gene assays using constructs containing various nucleotide spacing lengths between the SRE motif and the CCAAT box demonstrate that the 16 to 20-bp spacing range is required for maximal transcriptional regulation. These results agree with the findings that the distances between the two motifs in the known sterol responsive elements in several genes, including the human HMG CoA synthase and squalene synthase genes, are in this range.
94	PR	9553123	Progression through the cell cycle is controlled by the induction of cyclins and the activation of cognate cyclin-dependent kinases. The 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitor lovastatin induces growth arrest and cell death in certain cancer cell types. We have pursued the mechanism of growth arrest in PC-3-M cells, a p53-null human prostate carcinoma cell line. Lovastatin treatment increased protein and mRNA levels of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21(WAF1/CIP1), increased binding of p21 with Cdk2, markedly inhibited cyclin E- and Cdk2-associated phosphorylation of histone H1 or GST-retinoblastoma protein, enhanced binding of the retinoblastoma protein to the transcription factor E2F-1 in vivo, and induced the activation of a p21 promoter reporter construct. By using p21 promoter deletion constructs, the lovastatin-responsive element was mapped to a region between -93 and -64 relative to the transcription start site. Promoter mutation analysis indicated that the lovastatin-responsive site coincided with the previously identified transforming growth factor-beta-responsive element. These data indicate that in human prostate carcinoma cells an inhibitor of the HMG-CoA reductase pathway can circumvent the loss of wild-type p53 function and induce critical downstream regulatory events leading to transcriptional activation of p21.
94	NR	9524240	We have characterized the transcriptional regulation of ML-236B.Na and phenobarbital-inducible cytochrome P450sca-2 (CytP450sca-2) from Streptomyces carbophilus, an industrial pravastatin-producing strain. ML-236B.Na and phenobarbital enhanced the expression of the cytP450sca-2 gene in S. carbophilus. The cytP450sca-2 gene was also ML-236B.Na-inductive in S. lividans. Analysis of various deletion and mutation of the 5'-flanking region of the cytP450sca-2 gene revealed that the 1-kb region was required for ML-236B.Na-dependent CytP450sca-2 induction. We have found a putative ORF in the 5'-flanking region that encodes a protein of 174 amino acid residues containing a helix-turn-helix DNA-binding motif. A gel mobility shift assay showed that the protein was bound by an imperfect palindromic sequence between -46bp and -24bp in the 5'-flanking region, and ML-236B.Na was found to inhibit its binding. These findings suggest that induction of cytP450sca-2 is negatively regulated at the transcriptional level and that the protein encoded by the putative ORF is possibly functional as a repressor of the cytP450sca-2 gene.
94	NR	9538248	CP-230821 is a novel, potent LDL receptor gene transcriptional upregulator which decreases total plasma cholesterol level. Interestingly, this plasma LDL decrease does not alter hepatic lipid contents. A series of experiments was undertaken to study the molecular biology of this phenomenon. Twelve hours after CP-230821 treatment, the transcriptional activity and mRNA level of the LDL receptor gene in HepG2 cells were increased by 264% and 426%, respectively. Although treatment with the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor compactin also increased LDL receptor gene transcription and mRNA, CP-230821 did not increase the level of HMG-CoA reductase gene transcription or mRNA. These results indicate that LDL receptor gene activity may play an important role in the decrease of plasma LDL level. These results further suggest that the LDL receptor gene and the HMG-CoA reductase gene are not strictly coordinately controlled.
94	NR	9566881	The human embryonic beta-like globin (epsilon-globin) gene is expressed in primitive erythroid cells of the yolk sac during the first few weeks of development. We have previously shown that developmental stage-specific expression of the epsilon-globin gene is mediated by multiple positive and negative regulatory elements upstream of the start of transcription. Of particular interest is one positive regulatory element, PRE II, that works together with other elements (PRE I and PRE V) to confer developmental stage- and/or tissue-specific expression on a minimal promoter. An approximately 85- to 90-kDa PRE II binding factor (PREIIBF) was identified in the nuclei of erythroid cells and shown to bind specifically to a novel 19-bp region within PRE II; binding of this protein to PRE II resulted in bending of the target DNA and was required for promoter activation. In this report, we present the cDNA expression cloning of PREIIBF. The cDNA encodes a previously identified member of the HMG domain family of DNA binding proteins termed SSRP1. By a number of biochemical and immunological criteria, recombinant SSRP1 appears to be identical to the PREII binding factor from erythroid nuclei. A hallmark of HMG domain proteins is their ability to bend their target DNAs; therefore, as we speculated previously, DNA bending by SSRP1/PREIIBF may contribute to the mechanism by which PRE II synergizes with other regulatory elements located upstream and downstream. In contrast with reports from other investigators, we demonstrate that SSRP1 binds DNA with clear sequence specificity. Moreover, we show that SSRP1/PREIIBF lacks a classical activation domain but that binding by this protein to PRE II is required for activation of a minimal promoter in stable erythroid cell lines. These studies provide the first evidence that SSRP1 plays a role in transcriptional regulation. SSRP1/PREIIBF may serve an architectural function by helping to coordinate the assembly of a multiprotein complex required for stage-specific regulation of the human epsilon-globin gene.
94	PR	9555953	Consumption of boiled coffee promotes an elevation of plasma cholesterol concentration in humans. The active compounds found in the lipid fraction of the coffee have been identified as the diterpenes cafestol and kahweol. We have studied the effects of pure cafestol on cholesterol metabolism in human skin fibroblasts (HSF). The uptake of [125I]-labeled tyramine cellobiose-labeled low density lipoprotein ([125I]TC-LDL) was decreased by about 50% (P< 0.05) after 18 h preincubation time with cafestol (20 microg/ml), as compared to the control cells. The specific binding of radiolabeled LDL was reduced by 54% (P < 0.05) after preincubation for 18 h with cafestol. A reduced amount of LDL receptors was demonstrated by a protein-normalized Scatchard plot analysis (20% decrease in Bmax) as well as by immunoblotting (25%) after cafestol incubation. No significant effect was observed on the level of mRNA for the LDL receptor after 11 and 23 h incubation with cafestol. Furthermore, we transfected HSF cells with a promoter region for the LDL receptor gene linked to a reporter gene, chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT). No change was seen in the CAT activity after incubation with cafestol (20 microg/ml). Moreover, cafestol caused a 2.3-fold (P < 0.05) higher incorporation of radiolabeled [14C]oleic acid into cholesteryl esters after 24 h incubation, as compared to control cells, suggesting an increased acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyl transferase (ACAT) activity. Incorporation of [14C]acetate into cholesterol was reduced by approximately 40% (P < 0.05) with cafestol (20 microg/ml), as compared to control after 24 h preincubation, indicating a decreased 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA (HMG-CoA) reductase activity. Our results suggest that intake of cafestol may cause increased concentration of plasma cholesterol via the down-regulation of low density lipoprotein receptors by post-transcriptional mechanisms.
94	PR	9514656	The mechanism by which depletion of hepatic cholesterol levels, achieved by inhibition of squalene synthase, alters hepatic LDL receptor, HMG-CoA reductase, and cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase gene expression was investigated by measuring transcription rates, mRNA stability, rates of translation, translational efficiency, and levels of sterol response element binding proteins. It was found that the transcription of both hepatic LDL receptor and HMG-CoA reductase were increased about twofold. The increase in LDL receptor transcription occurred within 2 h after giving 2 mg/kg zaragozic acid A, a potent inhibitor of squalene synthase. This preceded the increase in transcription of HMG-CoA reductase that occurred at 4 h. Increases in the stability of both of these mRNAs were also observed. These changes account for the increases in LDL receptor and HMG-CoA reductase mRNA levels previously observed. The rate of transcription of hepatic cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase was decreased to about 25% of control within 3 h after administration of zaragozic acid A, which correlates with the decrease in this mRNA. The rates of translation, as determined by pulse labeling, of both hepatic HMG-CoA reductase and LDL receptor were increased two- to threefold. The translational efficiency of these two mRNAs was also increased as judged by polysome profile analysis. There was an increase in mRNA associated with the heaviest polysome fraction and a decrease in that associated with monosomes. No significant change was observed in the levels of sterol response element binding protein 2, the form that mediates induced transcription, in response to zaragozic acid A treatment, indicating that this protein might not be involved in mediating the observed transcriptional changes. An increase in sterol response element binding protein -1 was observed 30 min after giving zaragozic acid A. The results suggest that compensatory responses to depletion of squalene-derived products involve alterations in the rates of transcription, mRNA stability, and translational of key proteins involved in cholesterol homeostasis. Copyright 1998 Academic Press.
94	NR	9514272	The mvaAB operon of Pseudomonas mevalonii encodes HMG-CoA reductase (EC 1.1.1.88) and HMG-CoA lyase (EC 4.1.3.4), enzymes that catalyze the initial reactions of mevalonate catabolism in this organism. Expression of this operon is regulated by the constitutively expressed transcriptional activator protein MvaT that binds in vitro to an upstream regulatory element. Mevalonate is essential for activation of transcription in vivo, and in vitro data demonstrated that MvaT binds to the mvaAB cis-regulatory element in the absence of mevalonate with a Kd,app of 2 nM. Purification of MvaT enriched for two polypeptides of approximate molecular mass 15 kDa and 16 kDa, designated P15 and P16. MvaT, assayed by its DNA-binding activity, comigrated with P15 and P16 during DNA-affinity chromatography, size-exclusion chromatography, and sucrose density gradient centrifugation. P15 and P16 also comigrated during denaturing isoelectric focusing of purified MvaT. Treatment of MvaT with dimethylsuberimidate formed a 31-kDa polypeptide complex that contained N-terminal sequences from P15 and P16. The apparent association of P15 and P16 in solution and their copurification with MvaT activity strongly suggests that MvaT is comprised of these two subunits. Size-exclusion chromatography gave an estimated molecular mass for MvaT of 33 kDa. A partial DNA sequence of the P16 gene was obtained using PCR employing degenerate primers directed against the N-termini of P15 and P16. P16 appears to be comprised of at least 128 aminoacyl residues having a predicted molecular mass of 14.3 kDa.
94	NR	9464279	We have recently shown that the gene for the mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase is a target for PPAR and that this receptor mediates the induction of this gene by fatty acids. With the aim of gaining further insight into the function and regulation of this gene we examined the effect of other members of the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily on its expression. We previously identified a regulatory element in the mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase gene promoter that confers transcriptional regulation by PPAR, RXR and the orphan nuclear receptor COUP-TF. In this study we demonstrate a trans-repressing regulatory function for HNF-4 at this same nuclear receptor response element (NRRE). HNF-4 binds to the mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase NRRE, and, in cotransfection assays in HepG2 cells, it represses PPAR-dependent activation of reporter gene linked to the mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase gene promoter. These results suggest that the mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase gene is subject to differential regulation by the interplay of multiple members of the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily.
94	NR	9430668	3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) synthase, a key regulatory enzyme in the pathway for endogenous cholesterol synthesis, is a target for negative feedback regulation by cholesterol. The promoter for HMG-CoA synthase contains two binding sites for the sterol regulatory element-binding proteins (SREBPs). When cellular sterol levels are low, the SREBPs are released from the endoplasmic reticulum membrane, allowing them to translocate to the nucleus and activate SREBP target genes. In all SREBP-regulated promoters studied to date, additional co-regulatory transcription factors are required. In the HMG-CoA synthase promoter there are several potential co-regulatory transcription factor binding sites, including an inverted CCAAT box. A similar element has been shown to function with SREBP to mediate sterol regulation of another gene involved in cholesterol metabolism, farnesyl diphosphate synthase. Here, we show that CCAAT binding factor/nuclear factor Y (CBF/NF-Y) binding to the CCAAT box is required for sterol-regulated transcription of HMG-CoA synthase. The SREBP sites and the inverted CCAAT box are normally separated by 17 base pairs, and we show that increasing this distance results in a decrease in the level of transcriptional regulation by sterols. Furthermore, we provide evidence that there is a direct interaction between CBF/NF-Y and the basic helix-loop-helix-zipper region of SREBP. Interestingly, this interaction does not occur efficiently with any of the isolated subunits and appears to require all three nonidentical CBF/NF-Y subunits in a preassembled complex. Since CBF/NF-Y only binds to DNA when all three subunits are in a complex, this would prevent SREBP from forming nonproductive associations with the individual subunits.
94	NR	9433138	Factors of the TCF/LEF HMG domain family (TCFs) exist in vertebrates, Drosophila melanogaster and Caenorhabditis elegans. It has very recently become evident that TCFs interact with the vertebrate WNT effector beta-catenin to mediate axis formation in Xenopus. Likewise, Armadillo (the Drosophila ortholog of beta-catenin) is genetically upstream of a Drosophila TCF in the Wingless pathway. Upon Wingless/Wnt signaling, Armadillo/beta-catenin associate with nuclear TCFs and contribute a trans-activation domain to the resulting bipartite transcription factor. The cytoplasmic tumor-suppressor protein APC binds to beta-catenin causing its destruction. In APC-deficient colon carcinoma cells, beta-catenin accumulates and is constitutively complexed with TCF factors. In APC-positive colon carcinomas and melanomas, dominant mutations in beta-catenin render it indestructable, providing an alternative mechanism to activate transcription of TCF target genes inappropriately. So, transcriptional activation of TCF target genes by beta-catenin appears to be a central event in development and cellular transformation.
94	NR	9343393	Octamer binding and Sox factors are thought to play important roles in development by potentiating the transcriptional activation of specific gene subsets. The proteins within these factor families are related by the presence of highly conserved DNA binding domains, the octamer binding protein POU domain or the Sox factors HMG domain. We have previously shown that fibroblast growth factor 4 (FGF-4) gene expression in embryonal carcinoma cells requires a synergistic interaction between Oct-3 and Sox2 on the FGF-4 enhancer. Sox2 and Oct-3 bind to adjacent sites within this enhancer to form a ternary protein-DNA complex (Oct-3*) whose assembly correlates with enhancer activity. We now demonstrate that increasing the distance between the octamer and Sox binding sites by base pair insertion results in a loss of enhancer function. Significantly, those enhancer "spacing mutants" which failed to activate transcription were also compromised in their ability to form the Oct* complexes even though they could still bind both Sox2 and the octamer binding proteins, suggesting that a direct interaction between Sox2 and Oct-3 is necessary for enhancer function. Consistent with this hypothesis, Oct-3 and Sox2 can participate in a direct protein-protein interaction in vitro in the absence of DNA, and both this interaction and assembly of the ternary Oct* complexes require only the octamer protein POU and Sox2 HMG domains. Assembly of the ternary complex by these two protein domains occurs in a cooperative manner on FGF-4 enhancer DNA, and the loss of this cooperative interaction contributes to the defect in Oct-3* formation observed for the enhancer spacing mutants. These observations indicate that Oct-3* assembly results from protein-protein interactions between the domains of Sox2 and Oct-3 that mediate their binding to DNA, but it also requires a specific arrangement of the binding sites within the FGF-4 enhancer DNA. Thus, these results define one parameter that is fundamental to synergistic activation by Sox2 and Oct-3 and further emphasize the critical role of enhancer DNA sequences in the proper assembly of functional activation complexes.
94	DR	9337129	Sry, the mammalian Y-linked testis determining gene, is a member of a family of genes known as Sox genes, which encode transcription factors related by a DNA-binding motif termed the HMG box. Sox genes are known to have diverse roles in vertebrate differentiation and development. We report here the cloning and characterisation of one of these genes, Sox11, in mice. In addition to an N-terminal HMG box domain, the deduced SOX11 protein contains a number of highly conserved C-terminal motifs, which may function in transcriptional regulation. Expression of Sox11 in mouse embryos was prominent in the periventricular cells of the central nervous system, suggesting a role in neuronal maturation. Expression was also observed in a wide range of tissues involved in epithelial-mesenchymal interactions, suggesting an additional role in tissue modelling during development.
94	PR	9308964	The Wnt pathway regulates the early dorsal-ventral axis in Xenopus through a complex of beta-catenin and HMG box transcription factors of the Lef/Tcf family. We show that the promoter of the dorsalizing homeo box gene siamois is a direct target for the beta-catenin/XTcf-3 complex, establishing a link between the Wnt pathway and the activation of genes involved in specifying the dorsal axis. By injecting siamois reporter constructs into the animal pole of Xenopus embryos, we show that a 0.8-kb fragment of the siamois promoter is strongly activated by beta-catenin. The proximal 0.5 kb, which is also activated by beta-catenin, contains three Lef/Tcf-binding sites. Mutations in these sites eliminate the beta-catenin-mediated activation of siamois and show that siamois is regulated by the beta-catenin/XTcf-3 complex, in combination with additional transcriptional activators. When expressed at the equator of the embryo, the siamois promoter is activated to much higher levels on the dorsal side than the ventral side. Ectopic ventral expression of beta-catenin raises the ventral expression of the siamois promoter to the dorsal levels. Conversely, ectopic dorsal expression of dominant-negative XTcf-3 abolishes the dorsal activation of the siamois promoter. Furthermore, elimination of the Lef/Tcf sites elevates the ventral expression of siamois, revealing a repressive role for XTcf-3 in the absence of beta-catenin. Finally, we find that the endogenous siamois activator, although present throughout the dorsal side of the embryo, is most potent in the dorsal vegetal region. We propose that the dorsal activation of siamois by the beta-catenin/XTcf-3 complex combined with the ventral repression of siamois by XTcf-3 results in the restriction of endogenous siamois expression to the dorsal side of Xenopus embryos.
94	NR	9291136	The chicken ovalbumin upstream-promoter transcription factor (COUP-TF) has a dual effect on the regulation of the mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) synthase gene. COUP-TF could act as a transcriptional activator or repressor of this gene through different DNA sequences. COUP-TF induces expression of a reporter gene linked to the mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase gene promoter in human hepatoma HepG2 cells, but represses it in a Leydig tumour cell line (R2C); in both these cell lines the expression of the mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase gene mimics that of liver and testis. The activation is promoted by a fragment of the gene from coordinates -62 to +28, which contains a GC box and a TATA box, and where no COUP-TF binding site was observed by in vitro DNA binding studies. On the other hand, the COUP-TF inhibitory effect is mainly due to repression of peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor-dependent activation of the gene, interacting with the region from -104 to -92. To our knowledge this work represents the second example of a target gene for COUP-TF I that could be either activated or repressed by the action of this receptor through different DNA sequences of the same gene.
94	PR	9234680	The retinoblastoma susceptibility gene product pRb restricts cellular proliferation by affecting gene expression by all three classes of nuclear RNA polymerases. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying pRb-mediated repression of ribosomal DNA (rDNA) transcription by RNA polymerase I, we have analyzed the effect of pRb in a reconstituted transcription system. We demonstrate that pRb, but not the related protein p107, acts as a transcriptional repressor by interfering with the assembly of transcription initiation complexes. The HMG box-containing transcription factor UBF is the main target for pRb-induced transcriptional repression. UBF and pRb form in vitro complexes involving the C-terminal part of pRb and HMG boxes 1 and 2 of UBF. We show that the interactions between UBF and TIF-IB and between UBF and RNA polymerase I, respectively, are not perturbed by pRb. However, the DNA binding activity of UBF to both synthetic cruciform DNA and the rDNA promoter is severely impaired in the presence of pRb. These studies reveal another mechanism by which pRb suppresses cell proliferation, namely, by direct inhibition of cellular rRNA synthesis.
94	DR	9210653	The possibility that potent inhibitors of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase may alter the mechanisms by which dietary cholesterol and farnesol regulate this gene was investigated by comparing the regulatory responses of rats maintained on diets with or without 0.04% Lovastatin supplementation to dietary cholesterol. It was found that the rate of hepatic HMG-CoA reductase transcription was significantly decreased by dietary cholesterol in animals fed Lovastatin-supplemented diets, whereas animals maintained on a normal chow diet showed no decrease in the rate of transcription. The levels of reductase mRNA were decreased to about 10% of controls in Lovastatin-supplemented animals in response to dietary cholesterol but not affected in nonsupplemented animals. Administration of farnesol, reputed to be the nonsterol regulator of reductase, to rats maintained on a diet containing Lovastatin decreased hepatic HMG-CoA reductase protein by 30% and the half-life of reductase immunoreactive protein to 4.0 h, which is close to that observed in chow-fed animals. In contrast, farnesol treatment does not affect the turnover rate of reductase protein in rats fed a normal chow diet. These results suggest that potent inhibitors of HMG-CoA reductase may unmask transcriptional regulation by dietary cholesterol and accelerated degradation of the reductase by the putative nonsterol regulator farnesol.
94	DR	9199299	The mammalian high-mobility-group protein I(Y) [HMG I(Y)], while not a typical transcriptional activator, is required for the expression of many eukaryotic genes. HMG I(Y) appears to recruit and stabilize complexes of transcriptional activators through protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions. The protein binds to the minor groove of DNA via three short basic repeats, preferring tracts of adenines and thymines arranged on the same face of the DNA helix. However, the mode by which these three basic repeats function together to recognize HMG I(Y) binding sites has remained unclear. Here, using deletion mutants of HMG I(Y), DNase I footprinting, methylation interference, and in vivo transcriptional assays, we have characterized the binding of HMG I(Y) to the model beta-interferon enhancer. We show that two molecules of HMG I(Y) bind to the enhancer in a highly cooperative fashion, each molecule using a distinct pair of basic repeats to recognize the tandem AT-rich regions of the binding sites. We have also characterized the function of each basic repeat, showing that only the central repeat accounts for specific DNA binding and that the presence of a second repeat bound to an adjacent AT-rich region results in intramolecular cooperativity in binding. Surprisingly, the carboxyl-terminal acidic tail of HMG I(Y) is also important for specific binding in the context of the full-length protein. Our results present a detailed examination of HMG I(Y) binding in an important biological context, which can be extended not only to HMG I(Y) binding in other systems but also to the binding mode of many other proteins containing homologous basic repeats, which have been conserved from bacteria to humans.
94	NR	9164842	The low ketogenic capacity of pigs correlates with a low activity of mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) synthase. To identify the molecular mechanism controlling such activity, we isolated the pig cDNA encoding this enzyme and analysed changes in mRNA levels and mitochondrial specific activity induced during development and starvation. Pig mitochondrial synthase showed a tissue-specific expression pattern. As with rat and human, the gene is expressed in liver and large intestine; however, the pig differs in that mRNA was not detected in testis, kidney or small intestine. During development, pig mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase gene expression showed interesting differences from that in the rat: (1) there was a 2-3 week lag in the postnatal induction; (2) the mRNA levels remained relatively abundant through the suckling-weaning transition and at maturity, in contrast with the fall observed in rats at similar stages of development; and (3) the gene expression was highly induced by fasting during the suckling, whereas no such change in mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase mRNA levels has been observed in rat. The enzyme activity of mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase increased 27-fold during starvation in piglets, but remained one order of magnitude lower than rats. These results indicate that post-transcriptional mechanism(s) and/or intrinsic differences in the encoded enzyme are responsible for the low activity of pig HMG-CoA synthase observed throughout development or after fasting.
94	NR	9129154	The >30 known members of the Ets multigene family of transcriptional regulators are increasingly being recognized for their involvement in early embryonic development and late tissue maturation, directing stage-specific and tissue-restricted programs of target gene expression. Identifiable primarily by their 85 amino acid ETS DNA-binding domain and dispersed across all metazoan lineages into distinct subfamilies, Ets genes also produce malignancies in humans and other vertebrates when overexpressed or rearranged into chimeras retaining the ETS domain, suggesting that their oncogenic potential is determined by the program of target genes they regulate. Searching for Ets factors that regulate expression of the HER2/neu (c-erbB2) oncogene in human breast cancer, we identified a new epithelium-restricted Ets encoding an ETS domain homologous to the Drosophila E74/human Elf-1 subfamily, an amino-terminal region (A-region or Pointed domain) homologous to the distantly related Ets-1 subfamily, and a serine-rich box homologous to the transactivating domain of the lymphocyte-restricted High Mobility Group (HMG) protein, SOX4. Recombinant protein encoded by ESX (for epithelial-restricted with serine box) exhibits Ets-like DNA binding specificity in electrophoretic mobility shift assays and, in transient transfection assays, transactivates Ets-responsive promoter elements including that found in the HER2/neu oncogene. ESX is located at chromosome 1q32 in a region known to be amplified in 50% of early breast cancers, is heregulin-inducible and overexpressed in HER2/neu activated breast cancer cells. Tissue hybridization suggests that ESX becomes overexpressed at an early stage of human breast cancer development known as ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS).
94	NR	9119228	LEF-1 is a transcription factor that participates in the regulation of the T-cell receptor alpha (TCR alpha) enhancer by facilitating the assembly of multiple proteins into a higher order nucleoprotein complex. The function of LEF-1 is dependent, in part, on the HMG domain that induces a sharp bend in the DNA helix, and on an activation domain that stimulates transcription only in a specific context of other enhancer-binding proteins. With the aim of gaining insight into the function of context-dependent activation domains, we cloned ALY, a novel LEF-1-interacting protein. ALY is a ubiquitously expressed, nuclear protein that specifically associates with the activation domains of LEF-1 and AML-1 (CBF alpha2, PEBP2 alpha(B), which is another protein component of the TCR alpha enhancer complex. In addition, ALY can increase DNA binding by both LEF-1 and AML proteins. Overexpression of ALY stimulates the activity of the TCR alpha enhancer complex reconstituted in transfected nonlymphoid HeLa cells, whereas down-regulation of ALY by anti-sense oligonucleotides virtually eliminates TCR alpha enhancer activity in T cells. Similar to LEF-1, ALY can stimulate transcription in the context of the TCR alpha enhancer but apparently not when tethered to DNA through an heterologous DNA-binding domain. We propose that ALY mediates context-dependent transcriptional activation by facilitating the functional collaboration of multiple proteins in the TCR alpha enhancer complex.
94	DR	9016563	The E-selectin cell adhesion protein plays a critical role in mediating adherence of leukocytes to endothelium at sites of inflammation. Cytokine-induced E-selectin expression on the surface of endothelial cells is transient; mRNA expression peaks at 3-4 h after induction and returns to basal levels within 24 h. The mechanism for this transcriptional down-modulation is not known. Promoter binding factors responsible for induced gene expression include NF-kappaB, which binds at three sites within the E-selectin promoter, and HMG-I(Y), which binds to the A/T-rich core found at the centre of these binding sites. Distamycin is an antibiotic that also binds A/T-rich DNA and inhibits HMG-I(Y) DNA binding. To study the role of HMG-I(Y) in E-selectin expression, we have examined the effect of distamycin on the cytokine-induced E-selectin expression cycle. We found that distamycin prolonged E-selectin expression, both by sustaining mRNA transcription and by extending the transcript's half-life. The distamycin effect on transcription was mediated through one of the three NF-kappaB-HMG-I(Y) binding sites (NF-kappaBII) within the promoter. This suggests that the NF-kappaB-HMG-I(Y) complex interacting at the NF-kappaBII site plays a role not only in cytokine induction of E-selectin expression, but also in its down-modulation.
94	DR	9119878	NA
94	NR	8955189	Platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1; CD31) is a cell adhesion molecule involved in transendothelial migration and expressed by hemopoietic and endothelial cells. To understand the mechanisms underlying its regulated expression, a genomic clone containing 1555 bp of the 5'-flanking region and the first exon of the human PECAM-1 gene has been isolated. The 5'-flanking region of the PECAM-1 gene lacks a consensus TATA box, but contains consensus motifs for Sp1, EGR1, ets, helix-loop-helix (HLH) box, GATA, AP-2, C/EBP, YY1, CCACC, LyF-1, imperfect octamer, heptamer, high mobility group proteins (HMG) box, and nuclear factor-kappaB, as well as shear stress-, retinoic acid-, glucocorticoid-, and acute phase-responsive elements, and an Alu sequence. Successive 5' to 3' or 3' to 5' deletions revealed tissue-specific promoter activity within the two contiguous 0.22-kb NheI/BglII and 0.44-kb BglII/PstI fragments. The transcriptional activity displayed by the 0.22-kb NheI/BglII fragment was specific for the myeloid lineage, whereas the promoter activity of the 0.44-kb BglII/PstI fragment was apparently restricted to endothelial cells. The transcriptional activity of the 0.22-kb NheI/BglII fragment was confirmed by 5' RACE (rapid amplification of 5' cDNA ends) and S1 nuclease protection experiments that revealed previously unidentified transcription start sites. The 0.22-kb NheI/BglII promoter exhibited PMA inducibility in myeloid cells and contained a PMA-responsive element recognized by Sp1 and EGR-1 transcription factors. Isolation and characterization of the human PECAM-1 promoter represent an initial step in elucidating the controlled expression of the PECAM-1 gene.
94	DR	9088107	The function of Sry for inducing a male gonad was identified due to a development of a transgenic XX male mouse with testes by introducing a single gene into an embryo. The intronless Sry encodes a putative transcriptional protein harboring an HMG motif. The sequence similarity within the HMG motif has been highly conserved despite less conservation in other domains. Hence, the HMG motif must play a critical role in the transcriptional regulation, leading to the development of a male gonad. However, a non HMG box C terminal domain of Sry protein may also be indispensable for inducing normal testicular development. Further, several autosomal genes, such as SF1, WT1, SOX and MIS, as well as a unique X chromosomal DAX1 were suggested to be associated with the development of gonadal sex in mammals. Therefore, the significance on the involvement of these genes in the molecular mechanism of mammalian sex determination should be also considered.
94	NR	8943338	NA
94	PR	8908154	Lovastatin, an inhibitor of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase, inhibits the synthesis of mevalonic acid and is widely used as an anti-atherosclerotic drug. The macrophage scavenger receptor (SCR), a trimeric membrane glycoprotein, is postulated to play a key role in atheroma macrophage foam cell formation. HMG-CoA reductase is involved in the control of the synthesis of glycoproteins and farnesylated proteins, including ras proteins, which are involved in the transcriptional regulation of SCR gene expression. Accordingly, we examined whether lovastatin alters the gene expression of SCRs in THP-1 cell derived human macrophages. Lovastatin (5-15 microM) caused a significant dose-related reduction in steady state levels of type-I SCR mRNA in phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA)-treated THP-1 cells. The addition of exogenous mevalonate (1 mM) completely restored the lovastatin-induced decrease of type-I SCR mRNA levels. While the addition of the isoprenoid end-product, isopentenyl adenine (50 microM), had little effect on the type-I SCR mRNA levels in lovastatin treated cells, the addition of isoprenoid farnesol (5 microM) largely restored the lovastatin-induced decrease of type-I SCR mRNA levels. Actinomycin D treatment showed that degradation rates of type-I SCR mRNA did not differ between the THP-1 derived cells with and without lovastatin treatment. Nuclear run-on assays showed that lovastatin markedly decreased the transcription of SCR gene in the cells. These results suggest that lovastatin inhibits the transcription of type-I SCR gene by affecting mevalonate metabolism, possibly through the farnesyl-pyrophosphate related end-product(s) in the THP-1-derived macrophages.
94	DR	8890171	High mobility group protein 1 (HMG1) is a non-histone, chromatin-associated nuclear protein with a proposed role in the regulation of eukaryotic gene expression. We show that HMG1 interacts with proteins encoded by the HOX gene family by establishing protein-protein contacts between the HMG box domains and the HOX homeodomain. The functional role of these interactions was studied using the transcriptional activity of the human HOXD9 protein as a model. HMG1 enhances, in a dose-dependent fashion, the sequence-specific DNA binding activity in vitro, and the transcriptional activation in a co-transfection assay in vivo, of the HOXD9 protein. Functional interaction between HMG1 and HOXD9 is dependent on the DNA binding activity of the homeodomain, and requires the HOXD9 transcriptional activation domain. HMG1 enhances activation by HOXD9, but not by HOXD8, of the HOXD9-controlled element. Specific target recognition and functional interaction with HMG1 can be transferred to HOXD8 by homeodomain swapping. We propose that HMG1-like proteins might be general co-factors in HOX-mediated transcriptional activation, which facilitate access of HOX proteins to specific DNA targets, and/or introduce architectural constraints in the assembly of HOX-containing transcriptional complexes.
94	NR	8877730	Interleukin 2 (IL-2) and interleukin 4 (IL-4) secreted by activated but not by resting mature T cells are pleiotropic cytokines affecting growth and differentiation of diverse cell types, such as T cells, B cells, and mast cells. There is little information about the molecular basis for the constitutive repression of IL-2 and IL-4 gene expression in unstimulated T cells. We investigated the possibility that wild-type (wt) p53, a nuclear tumor suppressor protein, might serve to repress IL-2 and IL-4 gene expression in murine E14 T lymphoma and in human Jurkat cells. We transiently cotransfected these cells with constitutive simian virus 40 (SV 40) early promoter expression plasmids overproducing wt or mutant murine p53 and with appropriate luciferase (luc) reporter plasmids containing the promoter elements of murine IL-2 and IL-4 genes to evaluate the effect of various p53 species on these promoters. Murine wt p53 derived from pSG5p53cD strongly repressed the IL-2 and IL-4 promoters in both cell lines induced by the phorbol ester TPA and the Ca2+ ionophore ionomycin but not, however, in uninduced cells. In similar transient transfection experiments with lymphoma cells, overexpression of deletion mutant species of murine p53 revealed that the N-terminal and C-terminal domains are crucial for inhibition of both IL-2 and IL-4 gene expression. These parts of p53 comprise the transactivation domain at the amino terminal side, which has previously also been shown to interact with the TATA-box binding-protein TBP and the carboxy-terminal oligomerization domain. Additionally, it was shown that a previously described inhibitory protein, the high-mobility-group protein HMG-I/Y, does not functionally interact with p53. Cotransfection of expression plasmids for both p53 and HMG-I/Y did not alter the extent of inhibition by the individual proteins. These data suggest that p53 can downmodulate both IL-2 and IL-4 gene expression and that both the transactivation and oligomerization domains of the tumor suppressor protein are essential for this transcriptional repression.
94	NR	8844688	Embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells and their embryo-derived counterparts, embryonic stem (ES) cells, have been used extensively to study the transcriptional regulation of the fibroblast growth factor-4 (FGF-4) gene. The FGF-4 gene is expressed in EC cells and ES cells, but it is repressed in their retinoic acid (RA)-induced differentiated counterparts. Previous studies have shown that the transcription of the FGF-4 gene is controlled by cis-regulatory elements located in the 5' flanking region of the gene, and by a powerful enhancer located approximately 3 kb downstream from the transcription start site. In the current study, gel mobility shift analysis was used to examine the binding of nuclear proteins to cis-regulatory elements involved in the transcription of the FGF-4 gene. We demonstrate that the transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 in nuclear extracts prepared from EC cells bind to three Sp1 motifs, one located in the downstream enhancer, and two located in the 5' flanking region of the gene. We also show that Sp1 and Sp3 bind to each of the Sp1 motifs when nuclear extracts prepared from EC-derived differentiated cells are used. In contrast, differentiation of EC cells and ES cells drastically reduces the ability of nuclear factors to bind to an octamer motif and an adjacent High Mobility Group (HMG) motif, which have been shown previously to play essential roles in the functioning of the FGF-4 enhancer. Together, these findings provide a mechanistic explanation of how the distant FGF-4 enhancer promotes transcription of this gene in EC cells and ES cells, and how differentiation of these cells represses transcription of the FGF-4 gene.
94	DR	8700510	The oncogene, v-rel is a member of the rel/NF-kappaB family of transcription factors. It causes a rapidly fatal lymphoma in young chicks and is capable of transforming both fibroblasts and primitive hematopoietic cells in culture. To understand the role of v-rel in transformation we constructed an inducible form of v-rel and used it to identify potential cellular target genes for v-rel regulation. In this paper we show that High Mobility Group Protein 14 (HMG 14) is expressed in a wide variety of v-rel transformed cell types. In addition we show that v-rel participates in the transcriptional regulation of HMG 14 and that extracts from v-relER cells interact with the HMG 14 promoter. These experiments suggest a role for v-rel in the regulation of a unique gene whose protein product may influence gene transcription in a global fashion.
94	PR	8662857	We have previously defined the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-responsive element (LRE) in the promoters of murine RANTES (regulated on activation normal T-cell expressed) (MuRantes) and murine IP-10/crg-2, chemokines which have potent chemotactic properties for inflammatory cells including monocytes and T lymphocytes. In the present work, we studied the transcriptional mechanism of MuRantes gene induction by virus and compared it with that of LPS in an effort to understand the host responses to virus and bacterial toxins at the molecular level. MuRantes mRNA expression is induced by Newcastle disease virus (NDV) and LPS in the RAW 264.7 macrophage cell line and peritoneal macrophages of LPS-responsive C3HeB/FeJ mice. In LPS-hyporesponsive C3H/HeJ mice, only NDV induces this chemokine gene, indicating that the pathways of transcriptional activation by NDV and LPS are not identical. Using a transient transfection assay, the minimal virus-responsive element (VRE) was localized between nt -175 and -116. The VRE contains previously defined LRE motif 1 (TCAYRCTT) and motif 3 ((T/A)GRTTTCA(G/C)TTT), which were shown to also be important for initiation of transcription by virus. NDV-stimulated nuclear extracts were tested for trans-activating factors able to bind the VRE. The chromosomal protein HMG-I(C) was shown to bind the 3'-A.T-rich domains of the VRE, and the presence of HMG-I(C) was demonstrated in the VRE-protein complex formed with nuclear extracts from NDV-stimulated, but not unstimulated cells. These findings demonstrate the role of HMG-I(C) in activation of MuRantes promoter by NDV.
94	NR	8636240	The different mRNA isoforms of the mouse Sox17 gene were isolated from adult mouse testis cDNAs. One form (referred to as form Sox17) encodes an Sry-related protein of 419 amino acids containing a single high mobility group box near the NH2-terminus, while the other form (referred to as form t-Sox17) shows a unique mRNA isoform of the Sox17 gene with a partial deletion of the HMG box region. Analysis of genomic DNA revealed that these two isoforms were produced at least by alternative splicing of the exon corresponding to the 5' untranslated region and NH2-terminal 102 amino acids. RNA analyses in the testis revealed that form Sox17 began at the pachytene spermatocyte stage and was highly accumulated in round spermatids. Protein analyses revealed that t-Sox17 isoforms, as well as Sox17 isoforms, were translated into the protein products in the testis, although the amount of t-Sox17 products is lower in comparison to the high accumulation of t-Sox17 mRNA. By the electrophoretic mobility-shift assay and the random selection assay using recombinant Sox17 and t-Sox17 proteins, Sox17 protein is a DNA-binding protein with a similar sequence specificity to Sry and the other members of Sox family proteins, while t-Sox17 shows no apparent DNA-binding activity. Moreover, by a cotransfection experiment using a luciferase reporter gene, Sox17 could stimulate transcription through its binding site, but t-Sox17 had little effect on reporter gene expression. Thus, these findings suggest that Sox17 may function as a transcriptional activator in the premeiotic germ cells, and that a splicing switch into t-Sox17 may lead to the loss of its function in the postmeiotic germ cells.
94	NR	8628238	In Neurospora crassa, mating and heterokaryon formation between opposite mating-types is controlled by a single locus with two alternate forms termed mt A and mt a. Previously, an open reading frame (mt A-1) that confers mating identity and heterokaryon incompatibility was characterized in the 5.3 kb mt A idiomorph. In this study, we describe the structural and transcriptional characterization of two additional genes in the mt A idiomorph, Mt A-2 and mt A-3. The 373 amino acid mt A-2 ORF has 23% identity to the SMR1 ORF of Podospora anserina. DNA sequence analysis of a mutation affecting ascospore to 129 amino acids. The 324 amino acids mt A-3 ORF has an HMG domain and shows 22% amino acid identity to SMR2 of P. anserina. Transcripts from mt A-2 and mt A-3 are constitutively expressed during both vegetative and sexual reproduction. The presence of upstream ORFs in the mt A-2 and mt A-3 transcripts suggests the possibility of post-transcriptional regulation of the expression mt A-2 and mt A-3 polypeptides.
94	NR	8626488	Regulation of squalene epoxidase (SE) gene expression was studied in comparison with those of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) reductase and low density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor. An increased expression of SE mRNA and protein content in mouse L929 cells grown in 10% lipoprotein-deficient fetal bovine serum (LPDS) for 48 h was found by performing immunoblot and Northern blot analyses when compared with the culture in the presence of fetal bovine serum (FBS). The same results in mRNA levels were seen using human cell lines HepG2, HeLa, and Chang liver cells. The increase of SE mRNA in HeLa cells grown in LPDS was preventable in a dose-dependent manner by feeding cells with 25-hydroxycholesterol or cholesterol. When an SE inhibitor, NB-598, was fed to HeLa cells grown in LPDS, it caused further increases in mRNA levels of SE, HMG-CoA reductase, and LDL receptor. In contrast, NB-598 had no effect on the message levels of these genes when fed to HeLa cells grown in FBS. These results suggest that sterol produced endogenously can also regulate SE expression at the level of transcription.
94	PR	8721984	We have used circular permutation and phasing electrophoretic mobility shift assays to determine the ability of the A and B forms of human progesterone receptor (PR) to bend target DNA. Studies were done with baculovirus-expressed full-length receptors purified to apparent homogeneity. By circular permutation analysis, both forms of PR induced substantial distortions in the structure of target DNA with calculated distortion angles (alpha D) of 57 degrees for PR-A and 84 degrees for PR-B. The apparent bend centers for both forms of PR were similarly located a few base pairs (-4 to -2 bp) from the middle of the progesterone response element. No differences were detected in the magnitude of distortion or apparent bend centers when PR was bound to hormone agonist (R5020) or the antagonist RU486. Phasing analysis, which can determine the orientation of a DNA bend, revealed that both forms of PR mediated directional bends toward the major groove of the DNA helix. Calculated directed bend angles (alpha B) were 40 degrees for PR-B and 31 degrees for PR-A. The chromatin high mobility group protein HMG-1, which acts as an accessory factor to enhance the binding affinity of purified PR for progesterone response elements, had minimal influence on PR-mediated DNA bending. This result, taken together with the fact that HMG-1 can form a ternary complex with PR and DNA, is consistent with the conclusion that HMG-1 facilitates PR binding by stabilizing a receptor-induced DNA conformation that is required for assembly of a high affinity PR-DNA complex. The results of this study also suggest that DNA bending may be coupled to transcriptional regulation since PR-B is generally a stronger transcriptional activator than PR-A and also mediates a larger bend in target DNA than PR-A.
94	PR	8613258	The virus-inducible enhancer of the human interferon-beta gene has served as an excellent example for the mechanisms controlling the activation and repression of transcription. This enhancer is activated by three different transcription factors that, with the help of the high mobility group protein HMG I(Y), assemble in a unique nucleoprotein complex that interacts as a unit with the basal transcriptional machinery. The assembly of unique enhancer complexes from similar sets of transcription factors may provide the specificity required for regulation of complex patterns of gene expression in higher eukaryotes.
94	NR	8742338	3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl (HMG) coenzyme A reductase mRNA accumulates preferentially in dark-grown Arabidopsis plants. As one step toward understanding the role that light plays in the regulation of the mevalonate pathway in plants, we characterized the suppression of HMG1 gene expression in response to illumination wavelength, duration, and fluence rate. The accumulation of HMG1 mRNA by dark treatment is suppressed by continuous exposure to white light and is dependent on the amount of light perceived during the period of illumination. By using promoter/reporter gene fusions we also demonstrate that this reaction is mediated by cis-acting elements that reside in the Arabidopsis HMG1 promoter and, therefore, is likely to be controlled at the transcriptional level. HMG1 expression is differentially responsive to continuous blue and red light but not to far-red light. In contrast, changes in HMG1 mRNA levels were not observed in response to brief light pulses of any spectrum, suggesting that continuous illumination is required for sustained and maximal suppression of HMG coenzyme A reductase expression. Taken together, these data indicate that light-mediated control of the HMG1 gene is mediated by a regulatory circuit that monitors aspects of both spectral quality and fluence and involves either multiple photoreceptors or a single photoreceptor that is differentially sensitive to both blue and red light.
94	DR	8548797	We present evidence that transcriptional activation of the human interferon-beta (IFN beta) gene requires the assembly of a higher order transcription enhancer complex (enhanceosome). This multicomponent complex includes at least three distinct transcription factors and the high mobility group protein HMG I(Y). Both the in vitro assembly and in vivo transcriptional activity of this complex require a precise helical relationship between individual transcription factor-binding sites. In addition, HMG I(Y), which binds specifically to three sites within the enhancer, promotes cooperative binding of transcriptional factors in vitro and is required for transcriptional synergy between these factors in vivo. Thus, HMG I(Y) plays an essential role in the assembly and function of the IFN beta gene enhanceosome.
94	DR	8825062	Animal cells synthesize cholesterol from acetyl CoA through a series of more than 20 enzymatic reactions. In addition, cells obtain cholesterol from plasma in the form of low-density lipoprotein (LDL), which is internalized via the LDL receptor and hydrolyzed to free cholesterol in lysosomes. Each cell must balance these internal and external sources while avoiding sterol shortage or overaccumulation. Both the biosynthetic and uptake pathways are well-regulated through feedback control. When cells are cultured in the presence of LDL, the activity of both 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG CoA) synthase and HMG CoA reductase decline by more than 90% and the number of LDL receptors also decreases (1). In the absence of LDL, the cells maintain high activities of these two enzymes, which are rate-limiting enzymes of the biosynthetic pathway, and also maintain a large number of LDL receptors on their surface. In this review we assess recent progress in understanding the mechanisms involved in transcriptional and posttranscriptional regulation of intracellular cholesterol metabolism.
94	NR	7585963	In C. elegans embryogenesis, the MS blastomere produces predominantly mesodermal cell types, while its sister E generates only endodermal tissue. We show that a maternal gene, pop-1, is essential for the specification of MS fate and that a mutation in pop-1 results in MS adopting an E fate. Previous studies have shown that the maternal gene skn-1 is required for both MS and E development and that skn-1 encodes a transcription factor. We show here that the pop-1 gene encodes a protein with an HMG box similar to the HMG boxes in the vertebrate lymphoid-specific transcriptional regulators TCF-1 and LEF-1. We propose that POP-1 and SKN-1 function together in the early embryo to allow MS-specific differentiation.
94	NR	7574724	Transcripts for hamster 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase are heterogeneous in length. This heterogeneity is due to variations in the length of 5'-untranslated leader (UTL) sequences, which are generated by both alternate splicing within the first exon as well as alternate transcription start sites. Because mRNA 5'-UTL sequences have a role in regulating translational efficiency, the level and distribution of HMG-CoA reductase transcripts were measured in both total cellular RNA and polysomes from the Syrian hamster cell line C100. Cells were treated with either lovastatin alone, lovastatin and 25-hydroxycholesterol (25-OH C), or lovastatin, 25-OH C, and mevalonate, three treatment regimens used in an earlier study to demonstrate nonsterol-mediated translational control of HMG-CoA reductase synthesis [D. M. Peffley (1992) Somat. Cell Mol. Genet. 18, 19-32]. When reductase mRNA was measured by 5'-extension analysis under the same conditions, levels of transcripts with 5'-UTL regions ranging from 41 to 81 bases were reduced approximately four- to eightfold. In contrast, transcripts with 5'-UTL regions 93 to 100 bases in length were not reduced, and transcripts with 5'-UTL regions approximately 300-400 bases in length increased twofold. The addition of 25-OH C alone or both 25-OH C and mevalonate to lovastatin-treated cells lowered HMG-CoA reductase mRNA levels fivefold in total cellular RNA as determined by RNase protection assay. No comparable change was observed with control ribosomal protein S17 mRNA. Postmitochondrial supernatants representing both translationally inactive monosomes and translationally active polysomes were prepared by sucrose gradient fractionation from cells incubated with the standard three treatments. Because 5'-UTL sequences of many mRNAs have a role in regulating translational efficiency we isolated RNA from each fraction and measured levels of reductase transcripts by 5'-extension analysis. Under all three conditions, transcripts with 5'-UTL sequences 41-103 bases in length were primarily associated with dense sucrose fractions that contain polysomes. In contrast, reductase transcripts with leader sequences 300 to 400 bases were almost exclusively associated with the less dense sucrose fractions containing monosomes. These results indicate that both the level and polysome distribution of individual reductase transcripts are influenced by the length of 5'-UTL sequences.
94	NR	7646560	Agents that inhibit hepatic cholesterol biosynthesis reduce circulating cholesterol levels in experimental animals and humans, and may be of pharmacological importance in the prevention of atherosclerosis. Azalanstat (RS-21607), a synthetic imidazole, has been shown to inhibit cholesterol synthesis in HepG2 cells, human fibroblasts, hamster hepatocytes and hamster liver, by inhibiting the cytochrome P450 enzyme lanosterol 14 alpha-demethylase. When administered orally to hamsters fed regular chow, RS-21607 (50 mg/kg/day) lowered serum cholesterol in a dose-dependent manner (ED50 = 62 mg/kg) in a period of 1 week. It preferentially lowered low density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and apo B relative to high density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol and apo A-1. It also lowered plasma cholesterol levels in hamsters fed a high saturated fat and cholesterol diet. RS-21607 inhibited hepatic microsomal hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) reductase activity in hamsters in a dose-dependent manner (ED50 = 31 mg/kg), and this was highly correlated with serum cholesterol lowering (r = 0.97). Cholesterol lowering by azalanstat and cholestyramine was additive, and the increase in HMG-CoA reductase brought about by cholestyramine was attenuated significantly by azalanstat. In vitro studies with HepG2 cells indicated that this modulation of reductase activity was indirect, occurring at a post-transcriptional step, and it is proposed that a regulatory oxysterol derived from dihydrolanosterol (or lanosterol) may be responsible for this regulation. Azalanstat does not appear to lower circulating cholesterol in the hamster by up-regulation of the hepatic LDL receptor, suggesting that other mechanisms are involved. Orally administered azalanstat (50-75 mg/kg) stimulated hepatic microsomal cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase activity by 50-400% in hamsters, and it is postulated that this may result from modified cholesterol absorption and bile acid synthesis.
94	NR	7791781	The POU domain protein Tst-1/Oct-6 is a transcriptional activator of human papovavirus JC virus in transient transfections. Because of its endogenous expression in myelinating glia, Tst-1/Oct-6 might also be an important determinant for the glia specificity of JC virus in vivo. Activation of viral early and late genes depends on the ability of Tst-1/Oct-6 to interact with an AT-rich element within the viral regulatory region. Here, we show that this element not only is bound by Tst-1/Oct-6 but, in addition, serves as a binding site for the high-mobility-group protein HMG-I/Y. In the presence of HMG-I/Y, Tst-1/Oct-6 exhibited an increased affinity for this AT-rich element. The specificity of this effect was evident from the fact that no stimulation of Tst-1/Oct-6 binding was observed on a site that did not allow binding of HMG-I/Y. In addition, both proteins interacted with each other in solution. Direct contacts were identified between the POU domain of Tst-1/Oct-6 and a short stretch of 10 amino acids in the central portion of HMG-I/Y. These results point to an accessory role for HMG-I/Y in the activation of JC viral gene expression by the POU domain protein Tst-1/Oct-6. In agreement with such a role, HMG-Y synergistically supported the function of Tst-1/Oct-6 in transient transfections, measured on the early promoter of JC virus or on an artificial promoter consisting of only a TATA box and the common binding element for Tst-1 and HMG-I/Y.
94	NR	7541292	The LDL receptor and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase play primary roles in the regulation of cellular cholesterol metabolism. To investigate the transcriptional regulation of lipid metabolism under physiological conditions ex vivo and its alterations during aging, we analyzed both the activity and mRNA concentration of the LDL receptor and HMG-CoA reductase in freshly isolated lymphocytes from healthy young and elderly donors. Data from fluorescent reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction indicated that not only plasma LDL but also plasma HDL downregulates lymphocyte LDL receptor mRNA. Downregulation by HDL was three times more effective than that by LDL and presumably involved specific HDL binding sites. There was coordinate regulation of HMG-CoA reductase mRNA with LDL receptor mRNA that was independent of plasma lipoprotein concentrations. Despite elevated plasma concentrations of LDL, lymphocytes from elderly donors paradoxically expressed increased levels of the LDL receptor (P = .030) and HMG-CoA reductase mRNA (P = .062). The age-related dysregulation of the LDL receptor was predominantly due to impaired downregulation by plasma LDL rather than by HDL. Thus, not only LDL but also HDL and age significantly influences the transcriptional regulation of the LDL receptor in extrahepatic cells in vivo.
94	DR	7775485	The human HMG-I/Y gene, encoding the non-histone "high mobility group" proteins HMG-I and HMG-Y, is transcriptionally activated in human K562 erythroleukemia cells by treatment with 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA). TPA treatment induces differentiation of K562 cells within 2-4 days after treatment. In this report, we show that transcriptional activation of the HMG-I/Y gene is dependent on protein synthesis and is an early event (2 h after induction) in the TPA-mediated differentiation process. Of the four functional transcription start sites present in the gene, only one (start site 2) is preferentially induced upon TPA treatment. This is the first report, to our knowledge, of the preferential utilization of a specific transcription start site in response to a particular stimulus in a gene that contains multiple promoters. This indicates that each start site in the gene has the potential to be independently regulated instead of being coordinately controlled as shown in a number of other genes. In addition, sequences upstream of the inducible start site, which contains a TPA-responsive element, mediates TPA inducibility through AP1 (or an AP1-like) transcription factor. The HMG-I/Y proteins function as key regulators of gene expression and play a significant role in chromatin structural changes as well. The cloning and sequence analyses previously reported indicated the structure of the HMG-I/Y gene to be highly complex and predicted its expression to be tightly regulated. The results presented here confirm and extend these earlier findings.
94	NR	7665995	The importance of cholesterol and "oxysterols" in the regulation of cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase is not clear. Previous in vivo studies suggest that cholesterol may up-regulate cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase, the rate-limiting enzyme in bile acid biosynthesis, but these studies are open to question as they were carried out in whole animals. Therefore, we used primary rat hepatocytes, cultured in serum-free medium, to determine the effects of cholesterol on the regulation of cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase. Squalestatin, a specific squalene synthase inhibitor, was used to block sterol but not isoprenoid biosynthesis in this system. Squalestatin (1 microM) decreased cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase specific activity to undetectable levels and decreased steady-state mRNA and transcriptional activity to 13% and 47% of controls, respectively. Mevalonolactone (2 mM) failed to restore cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase specific activity or steady-state mRNA levels in squalestatin-treated cells. Addition of cholesterol, delivered in beta-cyclodextrin, to squalestatin-treated cells restored cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase specific activity and steady-state mRNA to control levels in a concentration (25 microM to 200 microM) -dependent manner. In contrast, the individual addition of selected "oxysterols" (5-cholesten-3 beta, 7 alpha-diol; 5 alpha-cholestan-3 beta, 6 alpha-diol; cholestan-3 beta, 5 alpha,6 beta-triol; 5-(25R)-cholesten-3 beta,26-diol, all at 50 microM) failed to restore cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase mRNA levels in squalestatin-treated cells. These experiments provide evidence that cholesterol rather than "oxysterols" regulate cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase gene expression. Squalestatin (1 microM) treatment increased HMG-CoA reductase specific activity by 229% of controls. Addition of cholesterol (200 microM), but not mevalonolactone (2 mM), to squalestatin-treated cells decreased HMG-CoA reductase specific activity to 19% of control. The primary rat hepatocyte culture system in conjunction with a specific squalene synthetase inhibitor should be a useful model for elucidating the mechanism of regulation of cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase gene expression by sterols.
94	NR	7713903	The effect of disruption of the Golgi apparatus on 25-hydroxycholesterol-mediated transcriptional suppression and activation of acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase was examined. In Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells, brefeldin A (BFA) caused dose-dependent inhibition of 25-hydroxycholesterol-mediated suppression of mRNAs for four sterol-regulated genes: 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl (HMG)-CoA reductase, HMG-CoA synthase, farnesyl-diphosphate synthase, and the low density lipoprotein receptor. BFA prevented suppression whether added prior to or following a 4-h pretreatment with 25-hydroxycholesterol. In the presence of BFA (1 microgram/ml), 25-hydroxycholesterol-mediated suppression of mRNAs for HMG-CoA reductase, the low density lipoprotein receptor, and farnesyl-diphosphate synthase was almost completely blocked. HMG-CoA synthase mRNA was 80-90% suppressed by 25-hydroxycholesterol compared with 50-60% suppression in the presence of BFA. These effects of BFA were not due to alterations in mRNA stability. Disruption of the Golgi apparatus, as assessed by staining with a fluorescent lectin, correlated with concentrations of BFA that reversed mRNA suppression. Monensin was also found to block the effects of 25-hydroxycholesterol on suppression of HMG-CoA reductase. However, this ionophore decreased the other three sterol-regulated mRNAs to a similar degree as 25-hydroxycholesterol. In contrast to CHO cells, BFA-resistant PtK1 cells displayed normal down-regulation of HMG-CoA reductase and an intact Golgi apparatus in the presence of BFA and 25-hydroxycholesterol. Cholesterol esterification in CHO cells was stimulated to a similar extent by BFA (1 microgram/ml) and 25-hydroxycholesterol, and simultaneous treatment of CHO cells with both compounds was 60-70% additive. These results suggest that an intact Golgi apparatus is required for 25-hydroxycholesterol-mediated suppression of mRNA.
94	DR	7717981	In an earlier study [Choi, Lundquist and Peffley (1993) Biochem. J. 296, 859-866], we determined that 25-hydroxycholesterol regulates 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) reductase mRNA through a post-transcriptional mechanism that requires protein synthesis. To investigate whether 3'-untranslated sequences play a role in 25-hydroxycholesterol-mediated post-transcriptional control, we ligated approx. 1400 bp of the 3'-untranslated region of HMG-CoA reductase cDNA to the coding region of human beta-globin DNA. beta-Globin-3'-untranslated reductase fusion constructs were then transiently expressed in Chinese hamster ovary fibroblasts under conditions known to regulate reductase mRNA. There were no differences in beta-globin RNA levels in transfected cells incubated with or without lovastatin, a competitive inhibitor of reductase. However, in the presence of lovastatin and an oxysterol, 25-hydroxycholesterol, beta-globin RNA levels were decreased approx. 2-fold. Inhibition of protein synthesis with cycloheximide blocked the effects of 25-hydroxycholesterol on beta-globin RNA. Moreover, replacing the 3'-untranslated sequences with 1367 bp of the simian virus 40 enhancer region eliminated the regulatory effect of 25-hydroxycholesterol. Because the fusion construct has no sterol regulatory elements necessary for transcription, our results indicate that the change in beta-globin RNA occurred at a post-transcriptional level. In addition, we have shown that the 3'-untranslated region of HMG-CoA reductase cDNA imparted oxysterol-mediated post-transcriptional regulation to beta-globin RNA, an effect that required protein synthesis.
94	NR	7706298	A strong T cell-specific enhancer is located 3' to the human CD2 gene. Six sequences within this enhancer are bound by proteins present in T cell nuclear extracts. These sequences share homology with sequences bound by several transcription factors involved in T cell- and lymphoid-specific transcription. The results presented here demonstrate that the human T cell-specific transcription factor, SOX4, is able to bind to one of these regions; further, SOX4 transactivates transcription of a reporter gene via three tandem copies of this sequence. The binding of SOX4 to this site is not via a canonical HMG protein binding sequence, identifying a novel class of binding site for this protein. A second sequence within the CD2 enhancer closely resembles the IL-2 NF-AT site. We show that it is bound by the ets-related factor, Elf1. However, unlike the IL-2 NF-AT sequence, the CD2 NF-AT-like sequence is unable to confer transcriptional inducibility on a reporter gene. Consistent with this result, we show that the observed increase in expression of CD2 protein on the cell surface following T cell activation is a post-transcriptional event.
94	DR	7720710	The octamer transcription factors Oct1 and Oct2 are involved in the transcriptional regulation of both lymphoid-specific and ubiquitously expressed genes. Their activity depends critically on their interaction with distinct cellular cofactors. Therefore, we have isolated cDNAs encoding proteins that physically interact with Oct2. Here we describe the analysis of one such clone, representing the murine homologue of high mobility group (HMG) protein 2. We have mapped the interaction domains for both proteins and have shown that HMG2 and Oct2 interact via their HMG domains and POU homeodomains, respectively. This interaction is not restricted to Oct2, as other members of the octamer transcription factor family like Oct1 and Oct6 also interact with HMG2. The interaction with HMG2 results in a marked increase in the sequence-specific DNA binding activity of the Oct proteins. Interestingly, the HMG2 protein is not present in the protein-DNA complex detected by an electrophoretic mobility shift assay. The Oct and HMG2 proteins also interact in vivo. A chimeric protein, in which the strong transactivation domain of VP16 was fused directly to the HMG domains of HMG2, stimulated the activity of an octamer-dependent reporter construct upon cotransfection. Furthermore, the expression of antisense RNA for HMG2 specifically reduces octamer-dependent transcription. These results suggest that one of the functions of HMG2 is to support the octamer transcription factors in their role as transcriptional activators.
94	NR	7872789	We have examined the mechanisms of sterol-independent regulation of the expression of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme-A (HMG-CoA) reductase by mevalonate in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells. Serum lipoproteins, 25-hydroxycholesterol, or mevalonate each repress HMG-CoA reductase activity by fivefold or more, and mevalonate lowers the rate of reductase synthesis by twofold. However, while the expression of the HMG-CoA reductase promoter construct, T42 delta CAT, in stable transfectants is also repressed by serum lipoproteins and 25-hydroxycholesterol, mevalonate is without effect. In addition, while 25-hydroxycholesterol reduces the steady-state level of endogenous HMG-CoA reductase mRNA by more than threefold, mevalonate again has no effect. Mevalonate does partially regulate the expression of both the artificial promoter construct pTK-Kx3-CAT, containing three copies of the sterol regulatory element, SRE-1, and the full-length LDL receptor promoter construct, pLDLRCAT-6500 as well as the expression of functional LDL receptors. This transcriptional regulation appears to be mediated by sterol end products generated from added mevalonate. In CHO cells starved for mevalonate due to a mutation in the biosynthetic pathway, addition of 20 mM mevalonate accelerates the rate of degradation of HMG-CoA reductase by threefold whether new sterol biosynthesis is blocked or not. In such cells, addition of 25-hydroxycholesterol, by itself, also decreases the half-life of reductase from 11.6 to 2.3 h. In contrast, in cells acutely treated with a reductase inhibitor, sterol-accelerated degradation of reductase is only observed in the presence of submillimolar level of mevalonate. We conclude that large concentrations of exogenous mevalonate fail to generate a transcriptional regulator of HMG-CoA reductase in CHO cells but do lead to the formation of translational regulator(s) of reductase synthesis. In contrast, sterol regulators derived from exogenous mevalonate appear to be capable of downregulating the LDL receptor promoter. We further conclude that in the absence of pretreatment with a reductase inhibitor, the regulatory signals generated by sterols and nonsterols for accelerated degradation of HMG-CoA reductase are mutually independent. However, the enzyme synthesized in the presence of reductase inhibitors appears to exhibit an obligatory corequirement for low-dose mevalonate for sterol-accelerated degradation.
94	NR	7835596	BACKGROUND/AIMS: The decrease in cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase induced by intraduodenal infusion of taurocholate in bile fistula rats may be indirect, i.e., mediated through release or absorption of an intestinal factor in response to the presence of bile salts in the intestine. The aim of this study was to determine if negative feedback regulation of cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase can be shown when equimolar concentrations of taurocholate are administered intravenously, thus bypassing the intestine. METHODS: After 96 hours of biliary diversion, taurocholate (36 mumol.h-1.100 g, rat-1) was infused into the rats either intravenously or intraduodenally for the final 24 hours. Livers were then harvested for analysis of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase specific activity, cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase specific activity, messenger RNA levels, and transcriptional activity. RESULTS: Intraduodenally administered taurocholate significantly decreased HMG-CoA reductase and cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase specific activity by more than 50% and cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase steady-state messenger RNA levels and transcriptional activity by 50%-75%. In contrast, intravenous administration of taurocholate failed to down-regulate either cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase or HMG-CoA reductase. CONCLUSIONS: Passage of taurocholate through the intestine strongly potentiates negative feedback regulation of cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase. A putative intestinal factor, released or absorbed in the presence of bile acids in the intestinal lumen, may play a role in the regulation of bile acid synthesis.
94	NR	7832805	Our aim is to identify cellular genes whose transcriptional suppression by the v-src oncogene contributes directly and specifically to the transformed and tumorigenic phenotype. We used a modified PCR-based subtractive hybridization technique to isolate 9 cDNAs whose abundance in NIH3T3 fibroblasts is decreased 3-15-fold following transformation by the activated oncogene, v-src. Sequence analysis reveals that 3 cDNAs are unlike those in GenBank. The remaining 6 cDNAs are indentical or highly similar to rat helix-destabilizing protein gene (hnRNP A1), mouse CTLA-2 alpha cysteine protease, rat cytochrome c oxidase (COX) VIc subunit, mouse Type I collagen, human gravin and a partial human cDNA (clone A7C09) isolated by random automated sequencing. Northern blot analysis indicates that the basal level of transcripts in untransformed NIH3T3 of all the genes except mouse Type I collagen was at least 10-fold lower than that of HMG Co-A Reductase, which is abundantly transcribed. These data suggest that the down-regulation of some or all of these genes contributes to v-src-induced changes in mitogenic control or cell morphology.
94	DR	7993897	Several in vitro studies have suggested that high mobility group (HMG) protein 1 has a role in gene regulation as a trans activator or quasi-transcription factor. However, data on the molecular functions of HMG1 protein in these reactions are contradictory or obscure. In order to assess whether HMG1 protein does, in fact, have transcriptional activation potential, two assay systems in cultured cells were employed. HMG1 protein introduced into COS-1 cells as a complex with a reporter plasmid carrying the lacZ gene enhanced the level of the gene expression. Cotransfection of an expression plasmid carrying HMG1 cDNA into the cells with the reporter plasmid enhanced the activity of beta-galactosidase 2-3-fold in comparison with that of the control effector plasmid. The enhancement was proved to be dependent not on the replication but on the transcription of the reporter plasmid. In the cotransfection experiments, an expression plasmid the HMG1 molecule lacking the acidic carboxyl terminus repressed the expression of the reporter gene. The binding of an HMG1 protein variant lacking the acidic carboxyl terminus to DNA gave an extremely large shift of gel retardation in comparison with the complete HMG1 molecule. Together, these results indicate that HMG1 protein can enhance expression in cells in culture at the step of gene transcription and that the DNA binding domains comprising two-thirds of the HMG1 protein molecule are responsible for the inhibition property. Also, the acidic terminus of the HMG1 molecule is essential for the enhancement of gene expression in addition to elimination of the repression caused by the DNA binding. (ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
94	NR	7969117	Understanding how diverse transcription patterns are achieved through common factor binding elements is a fundamental question that underlies much of developmental and cellular biology. One example is provided by the fibroblast growth factor 4 (FGF-4) gene, whose expression is restricted to specific embryonic tissues during development and to undifferentiated embryonal carcinoma cells in tissue culture. Analysis of the cis- and trans-acting elements required for the activity of the previously identified FGF-4 enhancer in F9 embryonal carcinoma cells showed that enhancer function depends on sequences that bind Sp1 and ubiquitous as well as F9-specific octamer-binding proteins. However, sequences immediately upstream of the octamer motif, which conform to a binding site for the high-mobility group (HMG) domain factor family, were also critical to enhancer function. We have identified a novel F9-specific factor, Fx, which specifically recognizes this motif. Fx formed complexes with either Oct-1 or Oct-3 in a template-dependent manner. The ability of different enhancer variants to form the Oct-Fx complexes correlated with enhancer activity, indicating that these complexes play an essential role in transcriptional activation of the FGF-4 gene. Thus, while FGF-4 enhancer function is octamer site dependent, its developmentally restricted activity is determined by the interaction of octamer-binding proteins with the tissue-specific factor Fx.
94	NR	7853709	NA
94	NR	7967347	Chronic renal failure is associated with hyperlipidemia and atherosclerosis. The mechanism responsible for the observed increase of serum cholesterol in chronic renal disease is not certain. The objective of the present study was to characterize the effect of induced renal failure on 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase (HMG-CoA reductase) and cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase, the two rate determining enzymes of the cholesterol and bile acid biosynthetic pathways, respectively. Studies were carried out in rats with subtotal (75%) nephrectomy, which resulted in a marked elevation of blood urea nitrogen (371 +/- 44% of control, P < 0.001), and was accompanied by significant increases in the levels of serum cholesterol (133 +/- 7%, P < 0.005) and triglycerides (185 +/- 25, P < 0.01). In nephrectomized rats, an increase in the specific activity of HMG-CoA reductase (219 +/- 30% above control levels, P < 0.02) was observed. This increase occurred in the presence of elevated hepatic microsomal cholesterol concentrations (150 +/- 13% of controls, P < 0.01). Surprisingly, the increase in HMG-CoA reductase specific activity was not associated with parallel increases in HMG-CoA reductase steady-state mRNA levels and gene transcriptional activity. These uremic rats also exhibited a marked increase in the specific activity of cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase (240 +/- 559% of controls, P < 0.05). There was no concomitant increase in cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase steady-state mRNA levels or gene transcriptional activity. The factors responsible for the observed increases in HMG-CoA reductase and cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase specific activity in renal failure remain to be determined.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
94	NR	7913466	Fatty acids induce an increase in the transcription of the mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) synthase gene, which encodes an enzyme that has been proposed as a control site of ketogenesis. We studied whether the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) is involved in the mechanism of this transcriptional induction. We found that cotransfection of a rat mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase promoter-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter plasmid and a PPAR expression plasmid in the presence of the peroxisome proliferator clofibrate led to a more than 30-fold increase in chloramphenicol acetyltransferase activity, relative to the activity in the absence of both PPAR and inducer. Linoleic acid, a polyunsaturated fatty acid, increased this activity as potently as does clofibrate and more effectively than does monounsaturated oleic acid. We have identified, by deletional analysis, an element located 104 base pairs upstream of the mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase gene, which confers PPAR responsiveness to homologous and heterologous promoters. This is the first example of a peroxisome proliferator-responsive element (PPRE) in a gene encoding a mitochondrial protein. This element contains an imperfect direct repeat that is similar to those described in the PPREs of other genes. Furthermore, gel retardation and cotransfection assays revealed that, as for other genes, PPAR heterodimerizes with retinoid X receptor and that both receptors cooperate for binding to the mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase PPRE and subsequent activation of the gene. In conclusion, our data demonstrate that regulation of mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase gene expression by fatty acids is mediated by PPAR, supporting the hypothesis that PPAR has an important role at the transcriptional level in the regulation of lipid metabolism.
94	NR	8144506	Regulation of cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase mRNA level in Hep-G2 cells was studied and compared with that of two other sterol-responsive genes, those for the low density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase. In culture medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum (complete medium) for up to 24 h, the mRNA for cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase gradually increased to 2-fold of the time 0 control. Culture of Hep-G2 cells in serum-free medium for 24 h resulted in stimulation of mRNA levels for LDL receptor (5-fold) and HMG-CoA reductase (6-fold). Surprisingly, the mRNA level for cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase also increased 5-fold at 8 h and 4-fold at 24 h compared with the time 0 control. The addition of beta-migrating very low density lipoprotein (beta-VLDL) (40 micrograms/ml) and 25-hydroxycholesterol (5 micrograms/ml) prevented the increase in mRNA level for the LDL receptor, and HMG-CoA reductase and the levels were 10-26% of the control at 8 h. The effect with beta-VLDL was sustained for 24 h. With 25-hydroxycholesterol, both LDL receptor and HMG-CoA reductase mRNA returned to base line by 24 h. In contrast, beta-VLDL increased cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase mRNA level above the serum-free control within 8 h (+32%), and this was sustained for 24 h (+47%). There was a slight induction of cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase mRNA levels by 25-hydroxycholesterol at 8 h (+18%); but by 24 h, its level was below that of the control (-47%). There was no induction of cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase mRNA levels by beta-VLDL or 25-hydroxycholesterol when the cells were grown in complete medium. As determined by nuclear run-on assay, the increase in the transcriptional rate of the cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase gene in cells grown in serum-free medium (3.9-fold of the rate in complete medium) and incubated with beta-VLDL (+68% above serum-free control) at 8 h, was comparable with the increase in mRNA levels (3.5-fold and +32%, respectively). When bile salts were added to serum-free medium and cells cultured for up to 24 h, chenodeoxycholate and glycochenodeoxycholate caused a marked suppression of the level of cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase mRNA, while cholate and its conjugates did not.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)
94	NR	8138269	Cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase, the rate-limiting enzyme in the bile acid synthesis pathway, is down-regulated by taurocholate by way of negative feedback control at the level of gene transcription. The molecular basis of regulation of cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase by other hydrophobic bile salts and under more physiological conditions is not known. The aim of this study was to investigate the molecular basis of regulation of cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase by several naturally occurring bile salts in rats with intact enterohepatic circulation. Male Sprague-Dawley rats were pair-fed for 14 days normal chow (control), cholestyramine (5% of diet), cholic acid (1%), chenodeoxycholic acid (1%) or deoxycholic acid (0.25%). When rats were killed, livers were harvested and HMG-CoA reductase specific activity and cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase specific activities, steady-state mRNA levels and transcriptional activity were determined and compared with those of control rats fed normal chow. Compared with results in paired controls, cholestyramine feeding led to an approximate threefold increase in HMG-CoA reductase specific activity. Feeding of hydrophobic bile salts profoundly decreased the specific activity of HMG-CoA reductase. Cholestyramine led to a three-fold increase in cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase specific activity, steady-state mRNA levels and gene transcriptional activity. The feeding of cholic (1%), chenodeoxycholic (1%) and deoxycholic acid (0.25%) led to significant decreases in cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase specific activities (62%, 84% and 97%, respectively), steady-state mRNA levels (72%, 29% and 61%, respectively) and transcriptional activities (44%, 43% and 54%, respectively).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
94	NR	8120018	Farnesyl acetate and ethyl farnesyl ether, two analogues of farnesyl pyrophosphate, stimulate post-transcriptional down-regulation of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase, the rate-limiting enzyme in the biosynthesis of cholesterol and isoprenoids. Farnesyl acetate and ethyl farnesyl ether reduce translation of HMG-CoA reductase mRNA and enhance degradation of the enzyme, the same regulatory effects attributed to the putative non-sterol regulatory metabolite (Goldstein, J.L., and Brown, M.S. (1990) Nature 343, 425-430). HMGal, a fusion protein consisting of the membrane domain of HMG-CoA reductase linked to Escherichia coli beta-galactosidase, is subject to the same regulated degradation as HMG-CoA reductase (Skalnik, D. G., Narita, H., Kent, C., and Simoni, R. D. (1988) J. Biol. Chem. 263, 6836-6841). At 10 micrograms/ml (37.8 microM), farnesyl acetate and ethyl farnesyl ether trigger a 50-80% reduction in HMGal activity. Farnesyl acetate reduces the synthesis of HMG-CoA reductase and HM-Gal by 60-80%, but neither farnesyl compound affects HMG-CoA reductase mRNA levels. Farnesyl acetate and ethyl farnesyl ether stimulated the degradation of HMG-CoA reductase and HMGal, reducing the half-lives of the enzymes by 40-70%. In addition to their regulatory effects on HMG-CoA reductase, these farnesyl compounds also directly disrupt sterol synthesis.
94	DR	8313887	The nucleolar transcription factor UBF consists of two proteins, UBF1 and UBF2, which originate by alternative splicing. Here we show that deletion of 37 amino acids within the second of five HMG box motifs in UBF2 is important for the dual role of UBF as transcriptional activator and antirepressor. UBF1 is a potent antirepressor and transcriptional activator, whereas the ability of UBF2 to counteract histone H1-mediated repression and to stimulate ribosomal gene transcription both in vivo and in vitro is at least one order of magnitude lower. The difference in transcriptional activity between UBF1 and UBF2 is due to their different binding to the ribosomal gene promoter and enhancer. Apparently, the presence of an intact HMG box2 modulates the sequence-specific binding of UBF to rDNA control elements. However, the interaction of UBF with rDNA does not entirely depend on sequence recognition. Both UBF isoforms bind efficiently to four-way junction DNA, indicating that they recognize defined DNA structures rather than specific sequences. The results demonstrate that the HMG boxes are functionally diverse and that HMG box2 plays an important role in specific binding of UBF to rDNA.
95	NR	15028619	Active cell death, also known as apoptosis, has been implicated in the pathophysiology of diseases such as cancer, heart failure and neurodegenerative disorders. We report the anti-apoptotic function of IRAS, which was previously shown to bind imidazoline ligands. The amino acid sequence of human IRAS (hIRAS) is unrelated to known proteins, except for rat IRAS and a mouse homologue named nischarin, which binds the alpha5 integrin subunit of the fibronectin receptor. When stably transfected into PC12 cells, hIRAS localizes to the cytosol as a 167 kDa immunoreactive protein. Clonal PC12 cell lines expressing hIRAS displayed normal serum growth responses. However, hIRAS expression led to prolonged cell survival against known apoptotic stimuli: serum starvation or thapsigargin or staurosporine treatments. The apoptotic population of hIRAS-expressing cells was significantly reduced, and this protection was achieved by a decrease in caspase-3 activity, phosphatidylserine translocation, and nuclear fragmentation. Similar protective effect was obtained in COS7 cells transiently transfected with hIRAS. A partial activation of the PI3 kinase pathway is possibly implicated in the anti-apoptotic effect of IRAS. Thus, IRAS appears to represent a previously unknown anti-apoptotic protein involved in the regulation of cell survival.
95	DR	14981924	BACKGROUND: Conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) has strong chemoprotective properties in experimental animal models. The insulin-like growth factor (IGF) system has been implicated as a risk factor for the development of bladder cancer. The present study examined CLA regulation of TSU-Pr1 bladder cancer cell proliferation and apoptosis and the influence of CLA on IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR) signaling. MATERIALS AND METHODS: TSU-Pr1 cells were cultured in serum-free medium with 0, 2, 5, or 10 microM CLA and/or 10 nM IGF-I. [3H]Thymidne incorporation, DNA laddering, FACS analysis, immunoprecipitation and Western blotting were performed. RESULTS: CLA decreased DNA synthesis and induced apoptosis in TSU-Pr1 cells dose-dependently. Exogenous IGF-I alone increased viable cell numbers but did not counteract growth inhibition induced by CLA. CLA decreased IGF-IR and insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-1 protein levels. In addition, CLA decreased IGF-I-induced phosphorylation of IGF-IR and IRS-1, recruitment of the p85 subunit of phosphoinositide 3-kinase to IRS-1 and phosphorylation of Akt and extracellular signal-regulated kinase-1/2. CONCLUSION: These results suggest that CLA inhibits cell proliferation and stimulates apoptosis of TSU-Pr1 cells via its inhibition of the IGF-IR signaling pathway.
95	DR	14710369	There is compelling evidence from epidemiological studies in humans, as well as in vitro and in vivo experimental observations including transgenic animal models, for a role of the IGF/insulin signalling system in cancer tumourigenesis. In this review focused on breast cancer, we review the experimental evidence, discuss the cellular and molecular mechanisms of tumourigenicity by the IGFs and insulin and various possible therapeutic strategies based on the mechanisms discussed.
95	DR	14710367	The type 1 insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF1R) is a promising anticancer treatment target, being frequently overexpressed by tumours, and mediating proliferation, motility and apoptosis protection. Design of specific kinase inhibitors is problematic because of homology between the IGF1R and insulin receptor. This obstacle can be circumvented using sequence-specific molecular agents including antisense, triplex and ribozymes. Recent studies indicate that profound sequence-specific IGF1R gene silencing can be induced by small interfering RNAs that mediate RNA interference in mammalian cells. IGF1R downregulation blocks tumour growth and metastasis, and enhances sensitivity to cytotoxic drugs and irradiation. In murine melanoma cells, radiosensitisation is associated with impaired activation of Atm, which is required for initiation of cell cycle checkpoints and DNA repair pathways after double-strand DNA breaks. Furthermore, tumour cells killed in vivo following IGF1R downregulation can provoke an immune response, protecting against tumour rechallenge. After years of studying the role of the IGF system in tumour biology, novel agents for IGF1R targeting will soon be available for clinical testing. This review summarises the development of molecular agents, and considers factors that will influence clinical activity, including the requirement of established tumours for IGF signalling, and the efficacy and toxicity of IGF1R inhibitors.
95	DR	14709803	The insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGF-IR) is expressed in many cell types and is critical for normal growth and development. In the healthy mammary gland, the role of IGF-IR is not fully elucidated. However, IGF-IR, which is primarily expressed in the mammary epithelial cells, is known to play an obligatory role in cellular transformation, facilitating the progression to breast cancer. We have utilized the tetracycline regulatory (tet-on) system to generate an in vitro model system to allow us to further investigate IGF-I/IGF-IR function in mammary epithelial cells. A plasmid construct containing a mutant IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR-DN) fused to the tetracycline operator (tetOPh(CMV)-IGF-IR-DN) was stably transfected into MCF-7 human breast cancer cells. The conditional regulation of the IGF-IR-DN gene expression was studied in four independent clonal lines. The translated IGF-IR-DN protein was detected only in the stably transfected doxycycline- induced cells, and its expression was up-regulated (three- to sixfold) following induction. IGF-I stimulated cell proliferation diminished (twofold) in doxycycline- induced cells compared to uninduced cells, demonstrating that the transgene construct was functional and ruling out any pleiotropic effect that may be attributed to doxycycline. Interestingly, autophosphorylation of the IGF-IR and phosphorylation of the downstream substrate, insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1), was not inhibited in doxycycline/IGF-I treated cells, suggesting the possibility that activation of downstream substrates other than the IRS-1 may be critical for optimal cell proliferation. This novel in vitro model should allow us to more directly examine the role of IGF-I/IGF-IR signaling and function in mammary epithelial cells.
95	DR	14695208	The insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGF-IR) is overexpressed in many diverse tumor types and is a critical signaling molecule for tumor cell proliferation and survival. Therapeutic strategies targeting the IGF-IR may therefore be effective broad-spectrum anticancer agents. Through screening of a Fab phage display library, we have generated a fully human antibody (A12) that binds to the IGF-IR with high affinity (4.11 x 10(-11) M) and inhibits ligand binding with an IC(50) of 0.6-1 nM. Antibody-mediated blockade of ligand binding to the IGF-IR inhibited downstream signaling of the two major insulin-like growth factor (IGF) pathways, mitogen-activated protein kinase and phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase/Akt, in MCF7 human breast cancer cells. As a result, the mitogenic and proliferative potential of IGF-I and IGF-II were significantly reduced. A12 did not block insulin binding to the insulin receptor but could block binding to atypical IGF-IR in MCF7 cells. In addition, A12 was shown to induce IGF-IR internalization and degradation on specific binding to tumor cells, resulting in a significant reduction in cell surface receptor density. In xenograft tumor models in vivo, IGF-IR blockade by A12 was shown to occur rapidly, resulting in significant growth inhibition of breast, renal, and pancreatic tumors. Histological analysis of tumor sections demonstrated a marked increase in apoptotic tumor cells in antibody-treated animals. These results demonstrate that A12 possesses strong antitumor activity in vitro and in vivo and may therefore be an effective therapeutic candidate for the treatment of cancers that are dependent on IGF-IR signaling for growth and survival.
95	DR	14669164	Insulin is a mild mitogen and has been shown to potentiate mitogenic influence of other growth factors. Because hyperinsulinemia and/or overexpression of insulin receptors have been linked to development, progression, and outcome of breast cancer, we attempted to evaluate the mechanism of these associations. We have compared the expression of insulin receptors and the magnitude of insulin signaling in breast tumors and adjacent normal mammary tissue samples obtained from 20 patients. We observed that insulin binding more than doubled in the tumors as compared with the normal tissue (P <.01 by paired t test). Insulin signaling to Shc, judged by the magnitude of its phosphorylation, was also significantly enhanced in the tumors. In contrast, the phosphorylation of the insulin-receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1), Akt, and mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase were identical in the tumorous and normal mammary tissues. Finally, tumors displayed significantly increased amounts of farnesylated p21 Ras and geranylgeranylated Rho-A (P <.01), consistent with Shc-dependent activation of farnesyl (FTase) and geranylgeranyl transferases (GGTase) in the tumor tissue. We conclude that the mechanism of the mitogenic influence of insulin in breast cancer may include increased expression of insulin receptors, preferential hyperphosphorylation of Shc, and increased amounts of prenylated p21 Ras and Rho-A in tumor tissue as compared with adjacent normal mammary tissue.
95	NR	14668342	Receptor tyrosine kinases are integral components of cellular signaling pathways and are frequently deregulated in malignancies. The NTRK family of neurotrophin receptors mediate neuronal cell survival and differentiation, but altered NTRK signaling has also been implicated in oncogenesis. The ETV6-NTRK3 (EN) gene fusion occurs in human pediatric spindle cell sarcomas and secretory breast carcinoma, and encodes the oligomerization domain of the ETV6 transcription factor fused to the protein-tyrosine kinase domain of NTRK3. The EN protein functions as a constitutively active protein-tyrosine kinase with potent transforming activity in multiple cell lineages, and EN constitutively activates both the Ras-MAPK and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-Akt pathways. EN transformation is associated with constitutive tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1). Further, IRS-1 functions as the adaptor protein linking EN to downstream signaling pathways. However, the exact nature of the EN-IRS-1 interaction remains unknown. We now demonstrate that EN specifically binds the phosphotyrosine binding domain of IRS-1 via an interaction at the C terminus of EN. An EN mutant lacking the C-terminal 19 amino acids does not bind IRS-1 and lacks transforming ability. Moreover, expression of an IRS-1 polypeptide containing the phosphotyrosine binding domain acts in a dominant negative manner to inhibit EN transformation, and overexpression of IRS-1 potentiates EN transforming activity. These findings indicate that EN.IRS-1 complex formation through the NTRK3 C terminus is essential for EN transformation.
95	NR	14654552	PURPOSE: We compared the expression of the insulin receptor-related receptor (IRR) in primary human neuroblastomas with other biological and clinical parameters and the impact of its expression on prognostic outcome. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We studied 49 neuroblastomas of different clinical stages and histological subtypes for (a) IRR, insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-1R), TrkA, p75 neurotrophin receptor, and MYCN mRNA expression by reverse transcription-PCR; (b) MYCN gene amplification by Southern blot analyses; (c) cyclin A protein expression by Western blot analyses indicating proliferation rate; and (d) apoptotic index (AI) by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (Tdt)-mediated dUTP nick end-labeling assay. RESULTS: IRR mRNA expression was found in 25 (51%) neuroblastomas and correlated with stages 1, 2, 3, and 4S disease and with age </=12 months at diagnosis. IRR was expressed predominantly in neuroblastomas without MYCN gene amplification and coexpressed with IGF-1R, TrkA, and p75 neurotrophin receptor. IRR mRNA expression also correlated with an undifferentiated histology but not with the proliferation rate. In coexpression with IGF-1R, the IRR was associated with enhanced AI. IRR expression was significantly correlated with a good prognosis in all 49 neuroblastomas (6-year survival probability, 91.8% versus 49.7% for IRR nonexpression; P = 0.003). CONCLUSION: IRR expression is a new marker for a favorable prognosis in neuroblastoma that is independent of MYCN amplification and age at diagnosis. Our data suggest an influence of IRR on IGF signaling via IGF-1R because coexpression of these two receptor tyrosine kinases was significantly correlated with an undifferentiated histology, a high AI, and an advanced survival probability.
95	DR	14624225	PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Interferons are pleiotropic cytokines that exhibit important biologic activities, including antiviral, antitumor, and immunomodulatory effects. These cytokines have found important applications in clinical medicine, including the treatment of certain malignancies. The purpose of this review is to provide an update on basic and clinical research in the interferon field. RECENT FINDINGS: Significant advances have recently occurred in the field of type I interferon signal transduction. It is well known that the interferons transduce signals via activation of multiple signaling cascades, involving Jak kinases, signal transducer and activator of transcription proteins, Map kinases, and IRS and Crk proteins. Recent evidence indicates that the p38 Map kinase pathway plays an important role in type I interferon signaling in malignant cells and that its function is required for type I interferon-dependent gene transcription and generation of the antiproliferative of type I interferons. In clinical oncology, interferon-alpha remains an active and useful agent in the treatment of several malignant disorders, and efforts are underway to improve its efficacy by using different schedules and combinations with other agents. SUMMARY: This review summarizes the mechanisms of signal transduction of interferons and the emerging new concepts in this area. An update on the clinical applications of interferons in oncology is also provided, and potential translational applications, reflecting recent advances in the field, are discussed.
95	DR	14615489	We have previously shown that LCC6 wild-type (WT) cells, a metastatic variant of MDA-MB-435 cancer cells originally derived from a breast cancer patient, exhibit enhanced motility in response to IGF-I compared with the parent MDA-MB-435 cells. To further understand the role of the type I insulin-like growth factor (IGF) receptor (IGF1R) in cancer metastasis we inhibited signaling via IGF1R using a C-terminal-truncated IGF1R. The truncated receptor retains the ligand binding domain but lacks the autophosphorylated tyrosine residues in the carboxyl terminus. Cells stably transfected with this truncated receptor (LCC6-DN cells) overexpressed the truncated IGF1R messenger RNA nearly 50-fold over endogenous receptor. The truncated receptor in the LCC6-DN cells behaved in a dominant negative manner to inhibit endogenous IGF1R activation by IGF-I. Compared with the LCC6-WT cells, LCC6-DN cells failed to phosphorylate the adaptor proteins insulin receptor substrate-1 and -2 in response to IGF-I and did not activate Akt after exposure to IGF-I. Unlike LCC6-WT cells, LCC6-DN cells did not show enhanced motility in response to IGF-I. To assay for metastasis, LCC6-WT and LCC6-DN cells were injected into the mammary fat pads of mice, and the primary xenograft tumors were removed after 21 days. Mice sacrificed 5 weeks later showed multiple lung metastases derived from LCC-WT xenografts, whereas mice harboring LCC6-DN xenografts showed no lung metastases. Our data show that IGF1R can regulate several aspects of the malignant phenotype. In these cells, metastasis but not proliferation requires IGF1R function.
95	NR	14604996	Vascular permeability factor/vascular endothelial growth factor (VPF/VEGF), the critical molecule in tumor angiogenesis, is regulated by different stimuli, such as hypoxia and oncogenes, and also by growth factors. Previously we have shown that in AsPC-1 pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells, insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF-IR) regulates VPF/VEGF expression. Insulin receptor substrate-1 and -2 (IRS-1 and IRS-2), two major downstream molecules of IGF-1R, are known to be important in the genesis of diabetes. In this study, we have defined a new role of IRS in angiogenesis. Both of the IRS proteins modulate VPF/VEGF expression in pancreatic cancer cells by different mechanistic pathways. The Sp1-dependent VPF/VEGF transcription is regulated mainly by IRS-2. Protein kinase C-zeta (PKC-zeta) plays a central role in VPF/VEGF expression and acts as a switching element. Furthermore, we have also demonstrated that the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway, but not the Ras pathway, is a downstream event of IRS proteins for VPF/VEGF expression in AsPC-1 cells. Interestingly, like renal cancer cells, in AsPC-1 cells PKC-zeta leads to direct Sp1-dependent VPF/VEGF transcription; in addition, it also promotes a negative feedback loop to IRS-2 that decreases the association of IRS-2/IGF-1R and IRS-2/p85. Taken together, our results show that in AsPC-1 pancreatic carcinoma cells, Sp1-dependent VPF/VEGF transcription is controlled by IGF-1R signaling through IRS-2 proteins and modulated by a negative feedback loop of PKC-zeta to IRS-2. Our data also suggest that IRS proteins, which are known to play crucial roles in IGF-1R signaling, are also important mediators for tumor angiogenesis.
95	NR	14596677	Insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-1 and IRS-2 are the major substrates that mediate insulin action. Insulin itself regulates the expression of the IRS protein in the liver, but the underlying mechanisms of IRS-1 and IRS-2 regulation are not fully understood. Here we report that insulin suppressed the expression of both IRS-1 and IRS-2 proteins in Fao hepatoma cells. The decrease in IRS-1 protein occurred via proteasomal degradation without any change in IRS-1 mRNA, whereas the insulin-induced suppression of IRS-2 protein was associated with a parallel decrease in IRS-2 mRNA without changing IRS-2 mRNA half-life. The insulin-induced suppression of IRS-2 mRNA and protein was blocked by the phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3-kinase inhibitor, LY294002, but not by the MAP kinase-ERK kinase (MEK) inhibitor, PD098059. Inhibition of Akt by overexpression of dominant-negative Akt also caused complete attenuation of the insulin-induced decrease in IRS-2 protein and partial attenuation of its mRNA down-regulation. Some nuclear proteins bound to the insulin response element (IRE) sequence on the IRS-2 gene in an insulin-dependent manner in vitro, and the binding was also blocked by the PI 3-kinase inhibitor. Reporter gene assay showed that insulin suppressed the activity of both human and rat IRS-2 gene promoters through the IRE in a PI 3-kinase-dependent manner. Our results indicate that insulin regulates IRS-1 and IRS-2 through different mechanisms and that insulin represses IRS-2 gene expression via a PI 3-kinase/Akt pathway.
95	DR	14556818	OBJECTIVE: Insulin resistance is a common feature of both polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM); however, the persistent reproductive disturbances appear to be limited to the former, suggesting that insulin resistance in the ovary itself may confer this susceptibility. DESIGN: Prospective study. SETTING: University-affiliated department. PATIENT(S): Forty-four women undergoing IVF treatment, of whom 11 had polycystic ovaries and 33 had normal ovulation (NO). INTERVENTION(S): The various effects and signaling of insulin and insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) were examined in cultured ovarian granulosa cells treated with troglitazone (1 microg/mL) or with vehicle by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, western blot, and in vitro functional analyses. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Glycogen and DNA syntheses, mRNA and protein expression, and cellular localization of insulin/IGF-1 receptors and insulin receptor substrates (IRSs). RESULT(S): There were significant decreases in insulin-stimulated glucose incorporation into glycogen in PCOS cells, which is a metabolic action of insulin. However, IGF-1 stimulation was found to be greater in PCOS cells at all experimental concentrations with respect to thymidine incorporation compared with NO cells, which is a mitogenic action. Troglitazone increased the insulin-induced glycogen synthesis but reduced the IGF-1-augmented responses of DNA synthesis in PCOS cells to the range within those of NO granulosa cells. We then found that troglitazone treatment reversed the expression imbalance between IRS-1 and IRS-2 in PCOS cells. CONCLUSION(S): There is a selective defect in insulin actions in PCOS granulosa cells, which suggests ovarian insulin resistance, and this metabolic phenotype is associated with an enhanced IGF-1 mitogenic potential. Troglitazone could divergently alter expression of various IRS molecules and insulin actions and could be used as an ovarian insulin sensitizer and mitogen/steroidogenic inhibitor in PCOS.
95	NR	14534541	Both progesterone and the insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) are critically involved in mammary gland development and also in breast cancer progression. However, how the progesterone and IGF signaling pathways interact with each other to regulate breast cancer cell growth remains unresolved. In this study, we investigated progesterone regulation of IGF signaling components in breast cancer cells. We found that insulin receptor substrate-2 (IRS-2) levels were markedly induced by progesterone and the synthetic progestin R5020 in MCF-7 and other progesterone receptor (PR) positive breast cancer cell lines, whereas IRS-1 and the IGF-I receptor were not induced. The antiprogestin RU486 blocked the R5020 effect on IRS-2 expression. Ectopic expression of either PR-A or PR-B in C4-12 breast cancer cells (estrogen receptor and PR negative) showed that progestin upregulation of IRS-2 was mediated specifically by PR-B. The IRS-2 induction by R5020 occurred via an increase of IRS-2 mRNA levels. Furthermore, progestin treatment prior to IGF-I stimulation resulted in higher tyrosine-phosphorylated IRS-2 levels, increased binding of IRS-2 to Grb-2 and the PI3K regulatory subunit p85, and correspondingly enhanced ERK and Akt activation, as compared with IGF-I-only conditions. Taken together, our data suggest that IRS-2 may play an important role in crosstalk between progesterone and the IGFs in breast cancer cells.
95	NR	14516934	Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is now recognized as an important metabolic and reproductive disorder. It is associated with substantial defects in insulin action and secretion that confer a markedly increased risk for type 2 diabetes mellitus. Insulin resistance modifies reproductive function both by the direct actions of insulin on steroidogenesis and by disruption of insulin signaling pathways in the central nervous system. These insights have led to a new therapy for PCOS with insulin-sensitizing agents. Hyperandrogenemia and insulin resistance cluster in PCOS families, consistent with a genetic susceptibility to these abnormalities. There is evidence for both linkage and association of the hyperandrogenemia phenotype with an allele of a marker locus on chromosome 19, in the region of the gene encoding the insulin receptor.
95	NR	14512432	Polycystic ovary syndrome, characterized by hyperandrogenism and chronic anovulation, is frequently associated with insulin resistance. Ample evidence implicates a role for insulin in the genesis of ovarian hyperandrogenism. The objective of this study was to begin to define the intracellular signaling pathway(s) that mediates insulin regulation of 17alpha-hydroxylase activity in human ovarian theca cells. Third-passage theca cells, isolated from the ovaries of regularly cycling premenopausal women, were used. Insulin alone had no effect on 17alpha-hydroxylase activity or CYP17 mRNA expression but required costimulation with forskolin. At the insulin concentration used (10 ng/ml), a neutralizing antibody to the insulin receptor (but not an antibody to the type I IGF receptor) blocked the insulin stimulation of 17alpha-hydroxylase activity, demonstrating that the effects were mediated by the insulin receptor. Insulin stimulated both phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3-kinase) and extracellular signal-regulated kinase-1/2 (MAPK) pathways. Specific inhibition of MAPK kinase (MEK) with PD98059 or I0126 did not decrease the 17alpha-hydroxylase activity stimulated by forskolin or forskolin plus insulin. In contrast, the PI3-kinase inhibitor LY294002 completely blocked insulin-stimulated 17alpha-hydroxylase activity. Our data demonstrate that insulin stimulates PI3-kinase and extracellular signal-regulated kinase-1/2 activities in human theca cells, but only PI3-kinase mediates the insulin augmentation of forskolin-stimulated 17alpha-hydroxylase activity.
95	PR	12969331	Mammalian insulin and insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) signal through several receptors with different ligand specificities to regulate metabolism and growth. This regulation is defective in diabetes and in a wide variety of human tumors. Recent analysis in Drosophila melanogaster has revealed that insulin-like molecules (known as DILPs in flies) also control growth and metabolism, but probably do so by signaling through a single insulin receptor (InR). The intracellular signaling molecules regulated by this receptor are highly evolutionarily conserved. Work in flies has helped to dissect the network of InR-regulated intracellular signaling pathways and identify some of the critical players in these pathways and in interacting signaling cascades. Surprisingly, these studies have shown that DILPs control tissue and body growth primarily by regulating cell growth and cell size. Changes in cell growth produced by these molecules may subsequently modulate the rate of cell proliferation in a cell type-specific fashion. At least part of this growth effect is mediated by two small groups of neurons in the Drosophila brain, which secrete DILPs into the circulatory system at levels that are modulated by nutrition. This signaling center is also involved in DILP-dependent control of the fly's rate of development, fertility, and life span. These surprisingly diverse functions of InR signaling, which appear to be conserved in all higher animals, reflect a central role for this pathway in coordinating development, physiology, and properly proportioned growth of the organism in response to its nutritional state. Studies in flies are providing important new insights into the biology of this system, and the identification of novel components in the InR-regulated signaling cascade is already beginning to inform the development of new therapeutic strategies for insulin-linked diseases in the clinic.
95	DR	12960318	In a variety of malignancies, the immune-escape phenotype is associated, in part, with the inability of tumor cells to properly present their Ags to CTLs due to a deranged expression of MHC class I glycoproteins. However, these molecules were found to possess broader nonimmune functions, including participation in signal transduction and regulation of proliferation, differentiation, and sensitivity to apoptosis-inducing factors; processes, which are characteristically impaired during malignant transformation. We investigated whether the deranged expression of MHC class I expression by tumor cells could affect proper receptor-mediated signal transduction and accentuate their malignant phenotype. The malignant and H-2K murine MHC class I-deficient B16BL6 melanoma cells were characterized by an attenuated capacity to bind insulin due to the retention of corresponding receptor in intracellular stores. The restoration of H-2K expression in these cells, which abrogated their capacity to form tumors in mice, enhanced membrane translocation of the receptor, presumably, by modulating its glycosylation. The addition of insulin to H-2K-expressing melanoma cells cultured in serum-free conditions precluded apoptotic death by up-regulating the activity of protein kinase B (PKB)/Akt. In contrast, the deficiency for H-2K characteristic to the malignant clones was associated with a constitutive high activity of PKB/Akt, which rendered them resistant to apoptosis, induced by deprivation of serum-derived growth factors. The possibility to correct the regulation of PKB/Akt activity by restoration of H-2K expression in B16BL6 melanoma cells may be considered as an attractive approach for cancer therapy, since an aberrant activation of this enzyme is characteristic to resistant malignancies.
95	NR	12960057	IGFs are potent mitogens that play a crucial role in cell proliferation and/or differentiation and tumorigenesis. Insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) is a key protein in the IGF signaling pathway in the estrogen-dependent MCF-7 breast carcinoma cell line. In this study, three growth factors [fibroblast growth factor (FGF), epidermal growth factor (EGF), and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)] were tested for their ability to modulate IRS-1 protein expression and the IGF-I signaling pathway. FGF and, to a lesser extent, EGF were found to increase IRS-1 protein, whereas PDGF had no effect. This indicates that growth factors can specifically modulate IRS-1 protein content. The increases provoked by EGF and FGF were dependent on the MAPK signaling pathway but independent of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase) signaling and required de novo protein synthesis. We noted that the kinetics of MAPK activation was continuous in response to FGF but transient in response to EGF. In addition, transfection of cells with a constitutively active form of MAPK kinase, which results in continuous MAPK activity, increased IRS-1 expression. Taken together, these results suggest that stimulation of IRS-1 expression was therefore stronger when MAPK activity was sustained. Pretreatment of cells with EGF, FGF, or PDGF for 24 h reduced IGF-I-induced tyrosine phosphorylation per molecule of IRS-1. However, IGF-I-induced PI 3-kinase activity was decreased by 24 h of pretreatment with EGF or PDGF but not with FGF. Our results therefore demonstrate that different growth factors are capable of specifically modulating the IGF-I signaling via IRS-1. They further suggest that the FGF-induced increase in IRS-1 counterbalances the inhibition of IRS-1 tyrosine phosphorylation to allow normal stimulation of IGF-I-induced PI 3-kinase activity.
95	PR	12951645	BACKGROUND: We have previously reported that C-peptide exerts preventive and therapeutic effects on diabetic neuropathy in type 1 diabetic BB/Wor-rats and that it prevents duration-dependent hippocampal apoptosis in the same animal model. In the present study, we examined human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells to examine whether C-peptide stimulates cell proliferation/neurite outgrowth and whether it has antiapoptotic effects. METHODS: For neurite outgrowth, serum-starved cultures were treated with C-peptide and/or insulin or IGF-1. Neurites were visualized with NF-L antibody and measured morphometrically. Cell numbers were determined using an electronic cell counter. Scrambled C-peptide was used as a negative control. For assessment of apoptosis, SH-SY5Y cells were incubated with 100 mM glucose for 24 h, and the effects of C-peptide and/or insulin or IGF-1 were examined. Apoptosis was demonstrated by transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL)/4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) stainings, flow cytometry and changes in the expression of Bcl2. Activation of insulin signaling intermediaries was determined by Western blots. Translocation of NF-kappaB was demonstrated immunocytochemically. RESULTS: C-peptide but not scrambled C-peptide stimulated cell proliferation and neurite outgrowth. In the presence of 4 nM insulin, 3 nM C-peptide significantly increased autophosphorylation of the insulin receptor (IR) but not that of the insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-1R). It stimulated phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI-3 kinase) and p38 mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase activation, enhanced the expression and translocation of nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB), promoted the expression of Bcl2 and reduced c-jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) phosphorylation in excess of that of insulin alone. CONCLUSIONS: C-peptide in the presence of insulin exerts synergistic effects on cell proliferation, neurite outgrowth and has in the presence of insulin an antiapoptotic effect on high glucose-induced apoptosis but less so on hyperosmolar-induced apoptosis. These effects are likely to be mediated via interactions with the insulin signaling pathway.
95	NR	12941837	An antagonistic monoclonal antibody, designated EM164, has been developed which binds specifically to the human insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGF-IR) and inhibits the proliferation and survival functions of the receptor in cancer cells. EM164 was initially selected by a rapid cell-based screen of hybridoma supernatants to identify antibodies that bind to IGF-IR but not to the homologous insulin receptor and that show maximal inhibition of IGF-I-stimulated autophosphorylation of IGF-IR. EM164 binds tightly to IGF-IR with a dissociation constant K(d) of 0.1 nM, inhibits binding of IGF-I and antagonizes its effects on cells completely, and has no agonistic activity on its own. EM164 inhibits IGF-I-, IGF-II-, and serum-stimulated proliferation and survival of diverse human cancer cell lines in vitro, including breast, lung, colon, cervical, ovarian, pancreatic, melanoma, prostate, neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and osteosarcoma cancer lines. It also suppresses the autocrine or paracrine proliferation of several cancer cell lines. EM164 was the most potent antagonistic anti-IGF-IR antibody tested when compared with several commercially available antibodies. The in vitro inhibitory effect could be extended to in vivo tumor models, where EM164 caused regression of established BxPC-3 human pancreatic tumor xenografts in SCID mice. The antitumor effect of treatment with EM164 could be enhanced by combining it with the cytotoxic agent gemcitabine. These data support the development of EM164 as a candidate therapeutic agent that targets IGF-IR function in cancer cells.
95	DR	12937923	OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to determine the insulin receptor (IR) mRNA levels and IR tyrosine kinase activity in normal myometrium and leiomyoma. DESIGN: Experimental study. SETTING: Academic research center. PATIENTS: Five women with leiomyoma submitted to hysterectomy. INTERVENTION: Plasma membrane fraction of human myometrium and leiomyoma were prepared and samples were incubated with and without insulin. mRNA was isolated and RT-PCR with specific primers was performed. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Western blots of plasma membranes incubated with and without insulin were performed. Chemoluminescent methods followed by densitometry were used to assess IR autophosphorylation. RT-PCR with specific primers for IR gene sequences was used to determine IR mRNA levels. RESULTS: IR mRNA levels in myometrium (0.634+/-0.038) and in leiomyoma (0.649+/-0.047; p=0.813) were not different. The degree of insulin-stimulated IR autophosphorylation (relative optical density of the 95 kDa band) was also not different between myometrium (1.496+/-0.310) and leiomyoma (1.593+/-0.129; p=0.650). CONCLUSIONS: There was no difference in IR receptor expression and IR autophosphorylation between normal myometrium and leiomyoma. Other steps of insulin signaling chain may participate in the altered proliferation of leiomyomas.
95	NR	12894576	Polyomaviruses are implicated in a number of cancers, and the transforming activity of their early protein, large T-antigen, has been documented in a variety of cell types and in experimental animals (1). Although the pathways by which T-antigen induces uncontrolled cell growth are not fully defined, T-antigen mediated inactivation of tumor suppressors, p53 and pRB, is well-documented in some malignancies (2). Here we postulate that functional interaction between the insulin-like growth factor (IGF-IR) and the T-antigen of human polyomavirus JC (JCV T-antigen) may contribute to the process of malignant transformation in medulloblastomas: (i) the IGF-IR signaling system is strongly activated in medulloblastoma cell lines and medulloblastoma biopsies; (ii) the cytoplasmic protein, insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1), is translocated to the nucleus in the presence of JCV T-antigen; (iii) molecular characterization of the interaction between IRS-1 and JCV T-antigen indicates that the binding involves the N-terminal portion of IRS-1 (PH/PTB domain) and the C-terminal region of JCV T-antigen (aa 411-628); and finally (iv) competition for the IRS-1-JCV T-antigen binding attenuates anchorage-independent growth of T-antigen positive medulloblastoma cells in culture. Based on these findings, we propose a novel role for IRS-1 in JCV T-antigen-mediated deregulation of cellular equilibrium, which may involve uncoupling of IRS-1 from the surface receptor and translocation of its function to the nuclear compartment of the cell.
95	NR	12890573	Leptin, the 16 kDa protein product of the ob gene, is secreted by adipocytes. The long form leptin receptor (ObRb) is expressed at high levels in the hypothalamus, and regulates appetite and energy expenditure. The fact that serum concentration of leptin is correlated with body mass index (BMI) suggests reduced sensitivity to leptin. Even though hyperinsulinemia and hyperleptinemia could coexist in obese humans, little is known about the interaction of insulin and leptin. In this study, we examined the effect of insulin on leptin signaling using Huh 7 cells transiently transfected with ObRb cDNA. Insulin inhibits leptin-induced STAT3 phosphorylation in a time- and dose-dependent manner without affecting Janus tyrosine kinases (JAKs) JAK2 phosphorylation. Okadaic acid prevents the inhibitory effect of insulin on leptin-induced STAT3 activation.
95	NR	12888657	Conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) has chemoprotective properties in a variety of experimental cancer models. We have previously observed that dietary CLA inhibits colon tumorigenesis induced by 1,2-dimethylhydrazine in rats. In addition, our in vitro studies have shown that CLA inhibits DNA synthesis and induces apoptosis in HT-29 cells, the human colon adenocarcinoma cell line. The insulin-like growth factor (IGF) system regulates the growth of HT-29 cells by an autocrine mechanism. The present study examined whether the growth inhibitory effect of CLA is related to changes in the IGF system in HT-29 cells. To determine whether CLA inhibits IGF-II production, HT-29 cells were incubated in serum-free medium in the presence of various concentrations of CLA. CLA decreased protein levels of both mature and pro IGF-II and IGF-II transcripts. Whereas exogenous IGF-I and IGF-II produced an increase in cell number, neither IGF-I nor IGF-II counteracted the negative growth regulatory effect of CLA. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and Western blot analysis of total cell lysates revealed that CLA decreased IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR) transcript and protein levels in a dose-dependent manner. Immunoprecipitation/Western blot studies revealed that CLA inhibited IGF-I-induced phosphorylation of IGF-IR and insulin-receptor substrate (IRS)-1, recruitment of the p85 regulatory subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) to IGF-IR, IGF-IR-associated PI3K activity, and phosphorylated Akt and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)-1/2 levels. In conclusion, the inhibition of cell proliferation and induction of apoptosis by CLA in HT-29 cells may be mediated in part by its ability to decrease IGF-II synthesis and to downregulate IGF-IR signaling and the PI3K/Akt and ERK-1/2 pathways.
95	NR	12869569	Because insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) and its receptor play a pivotal role in many cancers, it is an attractive target for the design of inhibitors. Here we present a new family of bioisostere inhibitors, based on the structure of AG 538. AG 538 is a substrate-competitive inhibitor of the IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R), with an IC50 = 61 nM in a cell-free kinase assay (Blum, G., Gazit, A., and Levitzki, A. (2000) Biochemistry 39, 15705-15712). AG 538 is a low molecular weight compound containing two catechol rings, which are sensitive to oxidation in cells. We have therefore prepared and examined catechol bioisosteres of AG 538. These AG 538 bioisosteres possess similar biological properties to AG 538; they inhibit IGF-1R by a substrate-competitive mechanism and are non-competitive vis a vis ATP. They inhibit IGF-1R kinase activity in the sub-micromolar concentration range in cell-free assays. IGF-1 induced IGF-1R autophosphorylation; IRS-1 phosphorylation and protein kinase B activation are inhibited at a low micromolar concentration range when applied to intact cells. These inhibitors also block the formation of colonies in soft agar by prostate and breast cancer cells. The ability to replace catechol groups with a moiety that is more stable in cells may aid in developing non-catechol-containing substrate-competitive inhibitors targeted toward IGF-1R and possibly against other protein-tyrosine kinases.
95	PR	12857432	Maternal hyperglycemia alters placental glucose metabolism and induces placental hypercellularity. In this study we investigated, in JAr cells, the effect of a protein tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor, vanadate, on the insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS1)-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway and on cell proliferation in the presence of normal or high glucose concentration. When JAr cells were cultured in the presence of 25 mmol/l glucose, treatment with vanadate completely prevented SHP-2 association with IRS1. However, vanadate treatment reverted the effect of high glucose on basal and insulin-stimulated insulin receptor and IRS1 phosphorylation. Similar effects were observed on MAPK activation. These events determined a related modification in cell proliferation. Indeed, after high glucose and vanadate treatment, thymidine incorporation levels were comparable to those observed in the presence of normal glucose concentration and in the absence of vanadate. Therefore, in JAr cells, vanadate exerts an inhibitory effect on cell proliferation. This action is related to a modulation of the SHP-2 association with IRS1 that in turn might regulate the phosphorylation state of the main substrates involved in mitogenesic signaling of the insulin receptor.
95	NR	12840208	We examined the ability of polyphenols from tomatoes and soy (genistein, quercetin, kaempferol, biochanin A, daidzein and rutin) to modulate insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I)-induced in vitro proliferation and apoptotic resistance in the AT6.3 rat prostate cancer cell line. IGF-I at 50 micro g/L in serum-free medium produced maximum proliferation and minimized apoptosis. Polyphenols exhibited different abilities to modulate IGF-I-induced proliferation, cell cycle progression (flow cytometry) and apoptosis (Annexin V/propidium iodide and terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated deoxyuridine 5'-triphosphate nick end labeling). Genistein, quercetin, kaempferol and biochanin A exhibited dose-dependent inhibition of growth with a 50% inhibitory concentration (IC(50)) between 25 and 40 micro mol/L, whereas rutin and daidzein were less potent with an IC(50) of >60 micro mol/L. Genistein and kaempferol potently induced G(2)/M cell cycle arrest. Genistein, quercetin, kaempferol and biochanin A, but not daidzein and rutin, counteracted the antiapoptotic effects of IGF-I. Human prostate epithelial cells grown in growth factor-supplemented medium were also sensitive to growth inhibition by polyphenols. Genistein, biochanin A, quercetin and kaempferol reduced the insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) content of AT6.3 cells and prevented the down-regulation of IGF-I receptor beta in response to IGF-I binding. IGF-I-stimulated proliferation was dependent on activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and phosphatidylinositide 3-kinase pathways. Western blotting demonstrated that ERK1/2 was constitutively phosphorylated in AT6.3 cells with no change in response to IGF-I, whereas IRS-1 and AKT were rapidly and sensitively phosphorylated after IGF-I stimulation. Several polyphenols suppressed phosphorylation of AKT and ERK1/2, and more potently inhibited IRS-1 tyrosyl phosphorylation after IGF-I exposure. In summary, polyphenols from soy and tomato products may counteract the ability of IGF-I to stimulate proliferation and prevent apoptosis via inhibition of multiple intracellular signaling pathways involving tyrosine kinase activity.
95	NR	12821935	In breast cancer cells, 17-beta-estradiol (E2) upregulates the expression of insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1), a molecule transmitting insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) signals through the PI-3K/Akt survival pathways. The stimulation of IRS-1 by E2 has been documented on the transcriptional level. Here we studied whether the expression of estrogen receptor (ER)-alpha affects IRS molecules post-transcriptionally. We used ER-alpha-negative MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells and MDA-MB-231 cells with re-expressed ER-alpha. In MDA-MB-231 cells cultured under serum-free conditions, IRS-1 and IRS-2 were degraded through the 26S proteasome and calpain pathways. Re-expression of ER-alpha in MDA-MB-231 cells correlated with enhanced stability of IRS molecules. This effect coincided with significantly reduced ubiquitination of IRS-1 and IRS-2, but did not involve increased IRS-1 and IRS-2 transcription. The interference of ER-alpha with IRS-1 and IRS-2 turnover could rely on the competition for common degradation pathways, as in MDA-MB-231/ER cells, ER-alpha processing was blocked by proteasome and calpain inhibitors. Notably, a fraction of the cytosolic ER-alpha colocalized and coprecipitated with IRS-1 and IRS-2, indicating a possible common destination for these proteins. The stabilization of IRS-1 in MDA-MB-231/ER cells was paralleled by the upregulation of the IRS-1/Akt/GSK-3 pathway and improved survival in the presence of IGF-I, whereas IRS-2 was not involved in IGF-I signaling.
95	NR	12802339	Protein tyrosine phosphatases regulate signal transduction pathways involving tyrosine phosphorylation and have been implicated in the development of cancer, diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis and hypertension. Increasing evidence suggests that the cellular redox state is involved in regulating tyrosine phosphatase activity through the reversible oxidization of the catalytic cysteine to sulphenic acid (Cys-SOH). But how further oxidation to the irreversible sulphinic (Cys-SO2H) and sulphonic (Cys-SO3H) forms is prevented remains unclear. Here we report the crystal structures of the regulatory sulphenic and irreversible sulphinic and sulphonic acids of protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B), an important enzyme in the negative regulation of the insulin receptor and a therapeutic target in type II diabetes and obesity. We also identify a sulphenyl-amide species that is formed through oxidation of its catalytic cysteine. Formation of the sulphenyl-amide causes large changes in the PTP1B active site, which are reversible by reduction with the cellular reducing agent glutathione. The sulphenyl-amide is a protective intermediate in the oxidative inhibition of PTP1B. In addition, it may facilitate reactivation of PTP1B by biological thiols and signal a unique state of the protein.
95	NR	12790794	Estrogens and insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) act as mitogens promoting cell proliferation in normal breast tissue as well as in breast carcinomas. Both hormones have been shown to play a role in the development of breast cancer and were found to activate multiple signaling pathways leading to proliferation of human breast cancer cell lines in vitro. Originally, it was considered that these agents manifest their mitogenic actions through separate pathways, but a growing body of evidence suggests that the IGF- and estrogen-mediated signaling pathways are intertwined. 17beta-Estradiol (E2) has been shown to enhance IGF signaling at multiple levels. E2 treatment of breast cancer cells alters expression of nearly all of the IGF family members including IGF-I, IGF-II, IGF-binding proteins, IGF type I receptor (IGF-RI), and insulin receptor substrate 1. The ligand-bound estrogen receptor has been reported to bind to and to activate the IGF-RI directly. Vice versa, IGF signaling has been reported to enhance estrogen receptor activation in human breast cancer cells by inducing phosphorylation of the estrogen receptor. Finally, several groups have described synergistic effects of the combination of E2 and IGF-I on S phase entry in breast tumor cell lines. Here, we review recent, often contradictory, reports describing the effects of E2 and IGFs on the proliferation of breast tumor cells, with special emphasis on the synergistic effects of the two hormones.
95	NR	12776987	Recent experiments have unravelled novel signal transduction pathways that involve the SRC homology 2 (SH2) domain adapter protein SHB. SHB is ubiquitously expressed and contains proline rich motifs, a phosphotyrosine binding (PTB) domain, tyrosine phosphorylation sites and an SH2 domain and serves a role in generating signaling complexes in response to tyrosine kinase activation. SHB mediates certain responses in platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) receptor-, fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor-, neural growth factor (NGF) receptor TRKA-, T cell receptor-, interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptor- and focal adhesion kinase- (FAK) signaling. Upstream of SHB in some cells lies the SRC-like FYN-Related Kinase FRK/RAK (also named BSK/IYK or GTK). FRK/RAK and SHB exert similar effects when overexpressed in rat phaeochromocytoma (PC12) and beta-cells, where they both induce PC12 cell differentiation and beta-cell proliferation. Furthermore, beta-cell apoptosis is augmented by these proteins under conditions that cause beta-cell degeneration. The FRK/RAK-SHB responses involve FAK and insulin receptor substrates (IRS) -1 and -2. Besides regulating apoptosis, proliferation and differentiation, SHB is also a component of the T cell receptor (TCR) signaling response. In Jurkat T cells, SHB links several signaling components with the TCR and is thus required for IL-2 production. In endothelial cells, SHB both promotes apoptosis under conditions that are anti-angiogenic, but is also required for proper mitogenicity, spreading and tubular morphogenesis. In embryonic stem cells, dominant-negative SHB (R522K) prevents early cavitation of embryoid bodies and reduces differentiation to cells expressing albumin, amylase, insulin and glucagon, suggesting a role of SHB in development. In summary, SHB is a versatile signal transduction molecule that produces diverse biological responses in different cell types under various conditions. SHB operates downstream of GTK in cells that express this kinase.
95	NR	12776186	In the MCF-7 breast cancer cell line, insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) are known to elicit antiproliferative actions via the insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1)/PI 3-kinase/AKT pathway. All-trans retinoic acid (RA) is a potent inhibitor of MCF-7 cell proliferation, but the mechanism by which growth regulation is achieved remains unclear. We investigated the effects of RA on the regulation of the IGF-IR and its key signaling elements: IRS-1, IRS-2, and SHC. Treatment of MCF-7 cells with RA caused a significant reduction in IRS-1 protein and tyrosine phosphorylation levels at a concentration and time consistent with RA-mediated growth inhibition. IRS-1 regulation is selective, as RA did not influence IRS-2 or SHC levels. Downstream signaling events were also selectively reduced, as RA abrogated IGF-I-stimulated AKT activation but did not alter erk1/2 activation. To confirm the importance of IRS-1 regulation by RA, we examined the response to RA in MCF-7 cells overexpressing IGF-IR and IRS-1. RA resistance was observed in MCF-7 cells overexpressing IRS-1 but not IGF-IR. This suggests that RA-mediated growth inhibition requires the selective downregulation of IRS-1 and AKT. Therapeutic agents targeting the IRS-1/PI 3-kinase/AKT pathway may enhance the cytostatic effects of RA in breast cancer, since overexpression of IRS-1 and AKT have been reported in primary breast tumors.
95	DR	12767520	The insulin-like growth factor (IGF) family of ligands, binding proteins and receptors is an important growth factor system involved in both the development of the organism and the maintenance of normal function of many cells of the body. The system also has powerful anti-apoptotic effects. More recently, evidence has accrued to demonstrate that the IGFs play an important role in cancer. Individuals with serum IGF-II levels in the upper quartile of the normal range (and IGF binding protein-3 levels in the lower quartiles) have a relative risk for developing breast, prostate, colon and lung cancer. IGF-II is commonly expressed by tumor cells and may act as an autocrine growth factor; occasionally even reaching target tissues and causing tumor-induced hypoglycemia. The IGF-I receptor is commonly (though not always) overexpressed in many cancers, and many recent studies have identified new signaling pathways emanating from the IGF-I receptor that affect cancer cell proliferation, adhesion, migration and cell death; functions that are critical for cancer cell survival and metastases. In this review, many aspects of the IGF system and its relationship to cancer will be discussed.
95	NR	12763374	BACKGROUND/AIMS: Insulin- and insulin growth factor-1 stimulated signaling through the insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) promotes hepatocellular proliferation and survival. IRS-1 over-expression in transgenic (Tg) mouse livers caused constitutive activation of Erk mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) and phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K) resulting in significantly increased levels of DNA synthesis and larger hepatic masses relative to non-transgenic (non-Tg) littermates. However, the livers eventually ceased to grow but remained approximately 25% larger than non-Tg livers. We hypothesized that this growth homeostasis was achieved by parallel activation of pro-apoptosis pathways. METHODS: Since Fas-mediated apoptosis is a common mechanism of hepatocyte destruction, we investigated the potential role of Fas receptor as a regulator of hepatic mass in IRS-1 transgenic mice. RESULTS: Significantly increased Fas-receptor levels were detected in the livers of IRS-1 Tg compared to non-Tg mice by Western blot analysis. Functional activation of Fas-receptor in IRS-1 Tg livers was demonstrated by increased hepatocellular apoptosis caused by intravenous injection of anti-Fas (Jo-2). CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that the increased growth caused by IRS-1 over-expression is balanced by constitutive activation of pro-death mechanisms. Failure of the IRS-1 Tg mice to develop liver cancer may be due to preservation of pro-growth, pro-death homeostasis mechanisms.
95	DR	12746329	The A isoform of the insulin receptor (IR) is frequently overexpressed in cancer cells and is activated by IGF-II as well as by insulin, whereas the B isoform is predominant in differentiated tissues and responds poorly to IGF-II. The IR substrate-1 (IRS-1), a docking protein for the IR, is known to send a mitogenic signal and to be a powerful inhibitor of cell differentiation. We have investigated the biological effects of the two IR isoforms in parental 32D hemopoietic cells, which do not express IRS-1, and in 32D-derived cells in which IRS-1 is ectopically expressed. The effects of the two isoforms on cell survival, differentiation markers and nuclear translocation of IRS-1 were compared. The results confirm that the A isoform responds to IGF-II and preferentially sends mitogenic, antiapoptotic signals, whereas the B form, poorly responsive to IGF-II, tends to send differentiation signals.
95	PR	12746299	IGF-I stimulates insulin-like actions directly through its receptor, and it also enhances sensitivity to insulin-mediated effects in vivo. These studies were undertaken to analyze the role of IGF-I, insulin, and insulin/IGF-I hybrid receptors (HRs) in mediating IGF-I and insulin signaling in cells that had been made insulin-resistant by treatment with glucosamine. Human HepG2 cells, which express IGF-I receptors, insulin receptors (IRs), and IGF-I/insulin HRs, were exposed to 20 mM glucosamine; and the effects of IGF-I and insulin in stimulating glycogen synthesis were determined. An overnight exposure to glucosamine markedly attenuated the effects of insulin and IGF-I in stimulating glycogen synthesis. To determine which receptors were mediating this effect, the ability of insulin and IGF-I to stimulate phosphorylation of their respective receptors was analyzed. An 18-h exposure to glucosamine (20 mM) caused a 75% reduction in the ability of IGF-I to phosphorylate its receptor but no change in receptor abundance. Glucosamine also caused a major reduction in insulin-stimulated receptor phosphorylation, although, unlike IGF-I, there was also a 50% reduction in IR abundance. Exposure to glucosamine also resulted in a reduction in the ability of IGF-I or insulin to stimulate phosphorylation of insulin IGF-I/HRs. The combination of insulin plus IGF-I was a more potent stimulus of HR phosphorylation than either agent alone, and this combination was also more potent in partially reversing the inhibitory effect of glucosamine. Taken together, these findings indicate that glucosamine induces a loss of sensitivity to stimulation of insulin, IGF-I, or HR tyrosine kinase activity by insulin or IGF-I. Although insulin is able to partially reverse the effect of glucosamine on IR phosphorylation, it has a very minimal effect on glucosamine-induced inhibition of HR phosphorylation. However, the combination of IGF-I and insulin induces a major increase in HR phosphorylation, even in the presence of glucosamine, suggesting that it is improving the sensitivity of the HR to insulin activation.
95	NR	12725866	Interferons (IFNs) are pleiotropic cytokines that exhibit multiple biological effects on cells and tissues. IFN receptors are expressed widely in mammalian cells and virtually all different cell types express them on their surface. The Type I IFN receptor has a multichain structure, composed of at least two distinct receptor subunits, IFNalphaR1 and IFNalphaR2. Two Jak-kinases, Tyk-2 and Jak-1, associate with the different receptor subunits and are activated in response to IFNalpha or IFNbeta to regulate engagement of multiple downstream signaling cascades. These include the Stat-pathway, whose function is essential for transcriptional activation of IFN-sensitive genes, and the insulin receptor substrate pathway, which regulates downstream activation of the phosphatidyl-inositol-3' kinase. Members of the Map family of kinases are also activated by the Type I IFN receptor and participate in the generation of IFN signals. The p38 Map kinase pathway appears to play a very important role in the induction of IFN responses. p38 is rapidly activated during engagement of the Type I IFN receptor, and such an activation is regulated by the small G-protein Rac1, which functions as its upstream effector in a tyrosine kinase-dependent manner. The activated form of p38 regulates downstream activation of other serine kinases, notably MapKapK-2 and MapKapK-3, indicating the existence of Type I IFN-dependent signaling cascades activated downstream of p38. Extensive studies have shown that p38 plays a critical role in Type I IFN-dependent transcriptional regulation, without modifying activation of the Stat-pathway. It is now well established that the function of p38 is essential for gene transcription via ISRE or GAS elements, but has no effects on the phosphorylation of Stat-proteins, the formation of Stat-complexes, and their binding to the promoters of IFN-sensitive genes. As Type I IFNs regulate gene expression for proteins with antiviral properties, it is not surprising that pharmacological inhibition of the p38 pathway blocks induction of IFNalpha-antiviral responses. In addition, pharmacological inhibition of p38 abrogates the suppressive effects of Type I IFNs on normal human hematopoietic progenitors, indicating a critical role for this signaling cascade in the induction of the regulatory effects of Type I IFNs on hematopoiesis. p38 is also activated during IFNalpha-treatment of primary leukemia cells from patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia. Such activation is required for IFNalpha-dependent suppression of leukemic cell progenitor growth, indicating that this pathway plays a critical role in the induction of the antileukemic effects of IFNalpha.
95	PR	12674767	To study the regulatory effect of acute and chronic insulin treatment on insulin post-receptor signaling transduction pathway in a human hepatoma cell line (Hep G2), Hep G2 cells were incubated in the presence or absence of insulin with different concentrations in serum free media for 16 h and then stimulated with 100 nmol/L insulin for 1 min. Protein levels of insulin receptor beta-subunit (IR beta), insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) and p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase) were determined in total cell lysates by Western-immunoblot. Phosphorylated proteins IR beta, IRS-1 and interaction of PI 3-kinase with IRS-1 were determined by immunoprecipitation. Results showed that 1-min insulin stimulation rapidly induced tyrosine phosphorylation of IR beta and IRS-1, which in turn, resulting in association of PI 3-kinase with IRS-1. 1-100 nmol/L chronic insulin treatment induced a dose-dependent decrease in the protein level of IR beta and a slight decrease in the protein level of IRS-1. There was a more marked reduction in the phosphorylation of IR beta, IRS-1, reaching a nadir of 22% (P < 0.01) and 15% (P < 0.01) of control levels, respectively, after 16 h treatment with 100 nmol/L insulin. The association between IRS-1 and PI 3-kinase was decreased by 66% (P < 0.01). There was no significant change in PI 3-kinase protein levels. These data suggest that chronic insulin treatment can induce alterations of IR beta, IRS-1 and PI 3-kinase three early steps in insulin action, which contributes significantly to insulin resistance, and may account for desensitization of insulin action.
95	NR	12665574	HMGI-Y is an architectural transcription factor that regulates gene expression in vivo by controlling the formation of stereospecific multiprotein complexes on the AT-rich regions of certain gene promoters. Recently, we demonstrated that HMGI-Y is required for proper transcription of the insulin receptor (IR) gene. Here we provide evidence that transcriptional activation of the human IR promoter requires the assembly of a transcriptionally active multiprotein-DNA complex which includes, in addition to HMGI-Y, the ubiquitously expressed transcription factor Sp1 and the CCAAT-enhancer binding protein beta (C/EBP beta). Functional integrity of this nucleoprotein complex is required for full transactivation of the IR gene by Sp1 and C/EBP beta in cells readily expressing IRs. We show that HMGI-Y physically interacts with Sp1 and C/EBP beta and facilitates the binding of both factors to the IR promoter in vitro. Furthermore, HMGI-Y is needed for transcriptional synergism between these factors in vivo. Repression of HMGI-Y function adversely affects both Sp1- and C/EBP beta-induced transactivation of the IR promoter. Together, these findings demonstrate that HMGI-Y plays significant molecular roles in the transcriptional activities of these factors in the context of the IR gene and provide concordant support for the hypothesis that, in affected individuals, a putative defect in these nuclear proteins may cause decreased IR expression with subsequent impairment of insulin signaling and action.
95	NR	12657513	Leptin and glucose effect on cell growth has been investigated in the JAr human choriocarcinoma cells. When JAr cells were cultured in the presence of 6m M glucose (LG), proliferation and thymidine incorporation were induced by serum but not by leptin. At variance, at 25m M glucose (HG), proliferation and thymidine incorporation were stimulated by leptin and serum to a comparable extent. HG culturing also enhanced leptin-stimulated insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS1) and MAPK phosphorylation. Blockage of MAPK activity with PD98059 caused an inhibition of glucose- and leptin-dependent thymidine incorporation. At variance with HG conditions no effects were observed in cells cultured in 6m M glucose upon treatment with PD98059. Neither glucose nor leptin determined a modification in leptin receptors total content.In this study, we provide evidence that in placental cells, leptin, similarly to that observed with insulin, stimulates cell proliferation by inducing the IRS1/MAPK pathway in a glucose-dependent fashion.
95	DR	12649208	Constitutive cell surface receptor kinase signaling and persistent phosphorylation/inactivation of the retinoblastoma (pRb) family of proteins (pRb, p107 and p130, known as pocket proteins) have been implicated in conferring uncontrolled growth to melanoma cells. However, the signals linking receptor kinase activity to neutralization of pocket proteins have not yet been fully elucidated. We therefore used specific chemical inhibitors to examine pRb regulation in melanoma cells. The most efficient agent, AG1024, known as an inhibitor of insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor and insulin receptor, arrested melanoma cell growth in vitro at nanomolar concentrations within 24 h of application. AG1024 inhibited the mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase pathway and restored pRb tumor suppressive function. The latter was observed by the reduction in the phosphorylated forms of pRb, p107 and p130, and the formation of growth suppressive DNA binding complexes consisting of pRb and E2F1 or E2F3. The loss of phosphorylated forms of pRb at early time points after AG1024 application was not associated with suppression of cyclin-dependent kinases 2 and 4 activity but rather with proteasomal and nonproteasomal degradation. Thus, inhibition of melanoma cell proliferation by AG1024 is mediated by inhibition of mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 signaling and activation of pRb by a mechanism involving protein degradation.
95	NR	12637587	Previous studies from our laboratory have demonstrated that p190-B RhoGAP (p190-B) is differentially expressed in the Cap cells of terminal end buds (TEBs) and poorly differentiated rodent mammary tumors. Based on these observations we hypothesized that p190-B might play an essential role in invasion of the TEBs into the surrounding fat pad during ductal morphogenesis. To test this hypothesis, mammary development was studied in p190-B-deficient mice. A haploinsufficiency phenotype was observed in p190-B heterozygous mice as indicated by decreased number and rate of ductal outgrowth(s) at 3, 4, and 5 wk of age when compared with their wild-type littermates. This appeared to result from decreased proliferation in the Cap cells of the TEBs, a phenotype remarkably similar to that observed previously in IGF-I receptor null mammary epithelium. Furthermore, decreased expression of insulin receptor substrates 1 and 2 were observed in TEBs of p190-B heterozygous mice. These findings are consistent with decreased IGF signaling observed previously in p190-B-/- mouse embryo fibroblasts. To further assess if this defect was cell autonomous or due to systemic endocrine effects, the mammary anlagen from p190-B+/+, p190-B+/-, and p190-B-/- mice was rescued by transplantation into the cleared fat pad of recipient Rag1-/- mice. Surprisingly, as opposed to 75-80% outgrowths observed using wild-type donor epithelium, only 40% of the heterozygous and none of the p190-B-/- epithelial transplants displayed any outgrowths. Together, these results suggest that p190-B regulates ductal morphogenesis, at least in part, by modulating the IGF signaling axis.
95	NR	12626141	About half of infertility cases are attributable to female factors, of which anovulation is the leading cause. Most cases of anovulation are due to the polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS). Clinically PCOS, present in 5% of all women, consists of anovulation, acne, hirsutism, reversed LH-to-FSH ratio and often resistance to insulin. In some cases PCOS appears in familial clusters but its genetic cause is unknown. Several genes were suggested as possible culprits for PCOS but their involvement has not been proven. The central paradox regarding the role of insulin in PCOS is the high responsiveness to insulin by the ovary, as opposed to the resistance of the whole body. On the backdrop of knowledge of several paralogous genes for each of the participating proteins in the insulin signal transduction pathways, it is possible that different paralogues propagate the intracellular signal in the ovary as opposed to peripheral tissues. Studies by microarray techniques of the different gene expression profiles in the two ovarian cells and peripheral cells such as adipocytes could clarify whether the ovarian defect in PCOS is identical to the peripheral defect in insulin signal transduction, or whether serum insulin concentrations simply serve to reveal the ovarian defect.
95	NR	12618883	Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-2 is overexpressed in hepatocellular carcinoma and accompanying dysplastic lesions. IGF-2 signalling is mediated through IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R), while mannose 6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor-2 receptor (M6P/IGF-2R) controls pericellular levels of free IGF-2. We studied, by in situ hybridisation and immunohistology, 18 liver specimens with cirrhosis of different aetiology without neoplastic or dysplastic lesions. Immunohistology was also performed for insulin receptor IGF-1R and IGF-binding proteins 3 and 4. High focal levels of IGF-2 RNA were found in some hepatocytes of all livers with HBV- or HCV-induced cirrhosis (n=10), but in only one of the cirrhoses with nonviral aetiology (n=8). IGF-2 was overexpressed in biliary duct epithelial cells in one case. Compared with noncirrhotic liver, all cirrhotic specimens showed reduced hepatocellular expression of M6P/IGF-2R protein, which contrasted with enhanced expression in perisinusoidal cells. Immunostaining for the other antigens did not reveal significant differences. Upregulation of IGF-2 in some hepatocytes may lead to high focal IGF-2 levels sufficient to saturate local IGF-2 binding capacities, and may result in an increased susceptibility to cellular dedifferentiation and, ultimately, liver cancer. Downregulation of hepatocellular M6P/IGF-2R and upregulation of IGF-2 seem to be early events in hepatocarcinogenesis prior to the appearance of morphologically distinct dysplastic lesions. Elevated focal IGF-2 transcript levels may therefore indicate an increased risk for hepatocellular and cholangiocellular carcinomas.
95	DR	12618213	Insulin and growth hormone (GH) induce mitogenic and metabolic signals in cells, GH either directly or indirectly via IGF-I production. We have studied a spontaneous murine T-cell lymphoma (LB cells) devoid of IGF-1 receptors in which proliferation is maintained by insulin [Int. J. Cancer 50 (1992) 80], and show that GH is more potent than insulin, with both GH and insulin dose-response curves for thymidine incorporation being bell-shaped. Binding showed somatogenic rather than lactogenic GH receptors. Insulin stimulated phosphorylation of the insulin receptor and of a 160-kDa protein, identified as the IRS-4 protein. This phosphorylated IRS-4 associated with PI3-kinase, which was activated along with the downstream p70(S6) kinase, whereas the Ras-MAPK pathway was not. Using selective inhibitors, the PI3-kinase, but not p70(S6) kinase or MEK, was found to be involved in insulin-stimulated DNA synthesis. GH induced tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-4 and nuclear translocation of STAT5. The LB cells constitute a new model for studying GH and insulin signalling without interference of IGF-1 receptors.
95	NR	12605345	HIV protease inhibitor treatment is associated with insulin resistance. We have recently demonstrated that the HIV protease inhibitor indinavir influences initial insulin signaling steps in HepG2 cells. Here we investigated in the same cell model whether indinavir alters insulin-stimulated glycogen synthesis. Since an altered phosphotyrosine phosphatase activity could represent a mechanism by which insulin signaling is influenced, we also assessed potential indinavir effects on protein tyrosine phosphatase activity directed against tyrosine phosphorylated insulin receptor substrate-1. HepG2 cells were incubated for 48 h without or with indinavir (100 micro mol/l). Subsequently, the insulin-stimulated incorporation of 14C-glucose into glycogen was measured. In indinavir-treated cells the insulin effect on glycogen synthesis was reduced by 30 +/- 4.5 %. Dephosphorylation of immobilized tyrosine-phosphorylated insulin-receptor substrate-1 by the cell extracts was determined using a microwell plate-based method, and indinavir treatment did not alter this dephosphorylation. In conclusion, our data suggest that indinavir affects insulin-stimulation of glycogen synthesis in liver cells, and this may be related to the previously observed alterations in insulin signaling. Direct effects of indinavir on the GLUT4 transport system, that have been suggested from data in other cell systems, are unlikely in HepG2 cells that express no or almost no GLUT4 transport system. Finally, our data do not support the hypothesis that indinavir alters insulin signaling by influencing protein tyrosine phosphatase activity directed against insulin receptor substrate-1.
95	NR	12604614	The type 1 insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF1R) is often overexpressed by tumors and mediates growth and apoptosis protection. We previously showed that antisense reagents complementary to the IGF1R translation start site enhance radio- and chemosensitivity and impair Atm function. However these agents induce relatively modest IGF1R down-regulation and affect insulin receptor levels. To identify alternative sites for molecular targeting, we utilized scanning oligonucleotide arrays to probe the secondary structure of IGF1R mRNA. This strategy enabled selection of antisense oligonucleotides that generated high heteroduplex yield with IGF1R but not insulin receptor transcripts. Antisense oligonucleotides that hybridized strongly to IGF1R mRNA caused IGF1R down-regulation within intact tumor cells, whereas weakly hybridizing oligonucleotides were inactive. Furthermore, the ability of small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) to block IGF1R expression correlated with the accessibility of the target sequence within the transcript. Thus, siRNAs corresponding to weakly hybridizing oligonucleotides caused minor IGF1R down-regulation, whereas siRNAs homologous to accessible targets induced profound sequence-specific IGF1R gene silencing, blocked IGF signaling, and enhanced tumor cell radiosensitivity. This indicates that secondary structure in the target transcript has a major effect on siRNA efficacy. These findings have implications for siRNA design and suggest that IGF1R-targeting agents incorporating this mode of action have potential as anticancer therapy.
95	NR	12566306	Insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) stimulate breast cancer proliferation, motility, and survival.The type I IGF receptor (IGF1R) mediates the effects of IGF-I. Thus, inhibition of IGF1R activation could inhibit IGF action in breast cancer cells. A single-chain antibody directed against IGF1R (IGF1R scFv-Fc) has been shown to partially inhibit xenograft growth of MCF-7 cells in athymic mice. In this study, we have examined the effects of scFv-Fc on IGF1R signaling in the estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) MCF-7 breast cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. The antibody stimulated IGF1R activation in vitro in MCF-7 cells and was unable to block IGF-I effects. The antibody also stimulated proliferation of MCF-7 cells in monolayer growth assays. To determine how scFv-Fc could stimulate in vitro growth yet inhibit in vivo tumor growth, we examined the effect of scFv-Fc on IGF1R expression. In MCF-7 cells, scFv-Fc down-regulated IGF1R levels after 2 h, and the levels were greatly reduced after 24 h. In contrast, IGF-I treatment over the same time period did not affect IGF1R levels. Twenty-four-h pretreatment of cells with scFv-Fc blocked IGF-I mediated phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate-1 and subsequent extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 and phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase activation. In contrast, cells treated with 5 nM IGF-I for 24 h still retained the ability to further activate downstream signaling pathways in response to IGF-I. Moreover, pretreatment of MCF-7 cells with scFv-Fc rendered them refractory to further proliferation induced by additional IGF-I. Twenty-four-h pretreatment of cells with scFv-Fc also inhibited IGF-I stimulated anchorage-independent growth. scFv-Fc did not enhance antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity. In vivo, treatment of mice bearing MCF-7 xenograft tumors with scFv-Fc resulted in near complete down-regulation of IGF1R. Our data show that scFv-Fc stimulates biochemical activation of IGF1R, then causes receptor down-regulation, making MCF-7 cells refractory to additional IGF-I exposure. These results indicate that such chimeric single-chain antibodies against IGF1R have future potential in breast cancer therapy by causing down-regulation of receptor.
95	NR	12555073	Insulin-like growth factor-I receptor (IGF-IR) is frequently overexpressed in a variety of cancer types. Since many breast tumors and cancer cell lines overexpress IGF-IR, we tested IGF-I effects on chemotherapy-treated breast cancer cells. IGF-I protects from chemotherapy-induced apoptosis, suggesting that overlapping signaling pathways modulate IGF-I and chemotherapy treatment outcomes. Taxol and other chemotherapy drugs induce c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), a kinase that conveys cellular stress and death signals. Notably, in this paper we show that IGF-I alone induces a potent JNK response and this activity is reversed by inhibition of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase) with LY294002 in MCF-7 but not T47D cells. Cotreatment of cells with chemotherapy and IGF-I leads to additive JNK responses. Using cells overexpressing Akt, we confirm that IGF-I-mediated survival is Akt dependent. In contrast, overexpression of JNK significantly enhances Taxol-induced apoptosis and inhibits IGF-I survival effects. Further, JNK attenuates anchorage-independent growth of MCF-7 cells. The inhibitory effect of JNK appears to be mediated by serine phosphorylation of IRS-1 (insulin receptor substrate) since both Taxol and IGF-I treatment enhanced Ser(312) IRS-1 phosphorylation, while LY294002 blocked IGF-I-mediated phosphorylation. Taken together, these data provide a mechanism whereby stress or growth factors activate JNK to reduce proliferation and/or survival in breast cancer cells.
95	DR	12534368	OBJECTIVE: Insulin has well-known activities in controlling energy metabolism, cellular proliferation and biosynthesis of functional molecules to maintain a biological homeostasis. Recently, several studies have suggested that insulin may protect cells from apoptosis in different cell lines; however, little is known about the nature of its anti-apoptotic activity. In many clinical disorders, including type 2 diabetes mellitus, oxidative stress and the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is increased. With these facts as a background, we examined here whether insulin protects HepG2 cells from apoptosis by decreasing oxidative stress and, if so, which signaling steps are involved in this process. METHODS: Intracellular DNA content, the degree of nuclear condensation or poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase hydrolysis was measured to verify the occurrence of apoptotic events. Caspase-3 activity and ROS accumulation within cells were also measured. Western blot analysis was performed to identify signaling molecules activated in response to insulin. RESULTS: Serum starvation resulted in a marked accumulation of ROS, activation of caspase-3, and subsequent apoptotic cell death which were, in turn, markedly blocked by the addition of insulin. The anti-apoptotic activity of insulin was sensitive to blockade of two different signaling steps, activations of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3 kinase) and extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK). CONCLUSION: Insulin exerts an anti-apoptotic activity by suppressing the excessive accumulation of ROS within cells through signaling pathways including stimulation of PI3 kinase and ERK in HepG2 cells.
95	PR	12529177	A contribution of intracellular dehydration to insulin resistance has been established in human subjects and in different experimental systems. Here the effect of hyperosmolarity (405 mosmol/l) on insulin-induced mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase phosphatase (MKP)-1 expression was studied in H4IIE rat hepatoma cells. Insulin induces robust MKP-1 expression which correlates with a vanadate-sensitive decay of extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (Erk-1/Erk-2) activity. Hyperosmolarity delays MKP-1 accumulation by insulin and this corresponds to impaired MKP-1 synthesis, whereas MKP-1 degradation remains unaffected by hyperosmolarity. Rapamycin, which inhibits signalling downstream from the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and a peptide inhibiting protein kinase C (PKC) zeta/lambda abolish insulin-induced MKP-1 protein but not mRNA expression, suggesting the involvement of the p70 ribosomal S6 protein kinase (p70S6-kinase) and/or the eukaryotic initiation factor 4E-binding proteins (4E-BPs) as well as atypical PKCs in MKP-1 translation. Hyperosmolarity induces sustained suppression of p70S6-kinase and 4E-BP1 hyperphosphorylation by insulin, whereas insulin-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of the insulin receptor (IR) beta subunit and the IR substrates IRS1 and IRS2, recruitment of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase) regulatory subunit p85 to the receptor substrates as well as PI 3-kinase activation, and Ser-473 phosphorylation of protein kinase B and Thr-410/403 phosphorylation of PKC zeta/lambda are largely unaffected under hyperosmotic conditions. The hyperosmotic impairment of both, MKP-1 expression and p70S6-kinase hyperphosphorylation by insulin is insensitive to K(2)CrO(4), calyculin A and vanadate, and inhibition of the Erk-1/Erk-2 and p38 pathways. The suppression of MKP-1 may further contribute to insulin resistance under dehydrating conditions by allowing unbalanced MAP kinase activation.
95	PR	12511230	AIM: To study the effect of chronic insulin treatment on insulin post-receptor signaling transduction and whether the effects of metformin are transmitted throughout the cascade of insulin signaling intermediates in a human hepatoma cell line (Hep G2). METHODS: Hep G2 cells were incubated in serum free media containing either insulin 100 nmol/L or insulin 100 nmol/L plus different concentrations (0.01-10 mmol/L) of metformin for 16 h and then were stimulated with insulin 100 nmol/L for 1 min. RESULTS: Chronic treatment of insulin 100 nmol/L induced a significant reduction in the phosphorylation and protein expression of IR?, IRS1 and IRS2, which therefore resulted in a downregulation of association of PI3K with IRS. Therapeutic concentrations (0.01-0.1 mmol/L) of metformin prevented the changes induced by chronic insulin treatment in these post-receptor components of insulin signaling pathway. Tyrosine phosphorylation of IR?, IRS1, and IRS2 was increased by 2.7 fold (P < 0.01), 6.8 fold (P < 0.01), and 2.3 fold (P <0.01) of chronically insulin-treated cells alone, respectively, after metformin 0.1 mmol/L was added. The association of p85 with IRS1 and IRS2 was also increased from 34 % to 86 % (P <0.01) and from 30 % to 92 % (P <0.01), respectively. In contrast, metformin in pharmacological concentration (1-10 mmol/L) further inhibited tyrosine phosphorylation of IR?, IRS1, IRS2 and the interaction of PI3K with IRS. The association of IRS1 with p85 was further decreased by 58 % (P >0.05) and of IRS2 by 30 % (P <0.05). CONCLUSION: Chronic insulin exposure of Hep G2 cells induces the downregulation of insulin signal transduction via PI3K pathway. The effect of metformin on insulin signaling transduction represent a primary mechanism of metformin action in insulin resistant state.
95	PR	12504077	Protein-tyrosine phosphatase-1B (PTP1B) has been implicated as a negative regulator of insulin signaling. PTP1B dephosphorylates the insulin receptor and insulin receptor substrates (IRS-1/2), inhibiting the insulin-signaling pathway. PTP1B has been reported to be elevated in diabetes and insulin-resistant states. Conversely, PTP1B null mice have increased insulin sensitivity. To further investigate the effect of PTP1B reduction on insulin signaling, FAO rat hepatoma cells were transfected, by electroporation, with a specific PTP1B antisense oligonucleotide (ASO), or a control oligonucleotide. The PTP1B ASO caused a 50-70% reduction in PTP1B protein expression as measured by Western blot analysis. Upon insulin stimulation, an increase in the phosphorylation of the insulin receptor and insulin receptor substrates was observed, without any change in protein expression levels. Reduction of PTP1B expression in FAO cells also caused an increase in insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of PKB and GSK3, without any change in protein expression. These results demonstrate that reduction of PTP1B can modulate key insulin signaling events downstream of the insulin receptor.
95	NR	12503617	We have previously shown that the interleukin (IL)-4 signal transduction involves the Insulin Receptor Substrate (IRS) in human colorectal carcinoma cells LS513. In the present study it was tested whether IL-4 counters Insulin-like Growth Factor (IGF)-1 through competition at the IRS signal transduction pathway and, thus, induces a molecular "insulin resistance" or whether IL-4 invokes an alternative signal transduction. The activated receptors of IL-4 and IGF-I both docked to IRS-1 and IRS-2 and invoked IRS complex formation with phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3-kinase, as assessed by immunoprecipitation and detection of the precipitated compounds by immunoblot analysis. Both, IL-4 and IGF-1, signaling pathways induced phosphorylation of Akt kinase in a PI 3-kinase-dependent manner, as assessed by addition of the PI 3-kinase inhibitor Ly294002. Interleukin-4 stimulation induced mono-phosphorylation at serine residue S473 of Akt kinase but failed to activate the kinase. Insulin-like growth factor-1 stimulation invoked dual-phosphorylation at S473 and T308 of Akt kinase and subsequent activation of the kinase. When LS513 cells were treated with IL-4 to induce mono-phosphorylation of Akt, dual- phosphorylation and activation of Akt kinase in response to IGF-1 were still intact. Interleukin-4 yet reduced cell growth by at least 50% both, in the absence and presence of growth factor IGF-1. In the LS513 cells, IL-4 stimulated phosphorylation of Jak2, an adapter molecule at the IL-4 receptor, and phosphorylation of transcription factor Stat6 both, in the absence and presence of IGF-1. We found a similar IL-4 signal transduction and growth suppression in multiple human cell cultures, including primary cells. Our findings indicate that the molecular mechanism underlying growth suppression by IL-4 may depend on gene-expression but not on "insulin/growth factor resistance" at IRS.
95	DR	12497201	PURPOSE: Previous studies have demonstrated enhanced potency associated with the binary [DNA/epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)] targeting properties of SMA41 (a chimeric 3-(alkyl)-1,2,3-triazene linked to a 4-anilinoquinazoline backbone) in the A431 (epidermal carcinoma of the vulva) cell line. We now report on the dependence of its antiproliferative effects (e.g. DNA damage, cell survival) on the EGFR and the DNA repair protein O6-alkylguanine DNA alkyltransferase (AGT) contents of 12 solid tumor cell lines, two of which, NIH3T3 and NIH3T3 HER14 (engineered to overexpress EGFR), were isogenic. METHODS: Receptor type specificity was determined using ELISA for competitive binding, as well as growth factor-stimulation assays. DNA damage was studied using single-cell microelectrophoresis (comet) assays, and levels of EGFR were determined by Western blotting. The effects of SMA41 on the cell cycle of NIH3T3 cells were investigated using univariate flow cytometry. RESULTS: Studies of receptor type specificity showed that SMA41: (a) preferentially inhibited the kinase activity of EGFR over those of Src, insulin receptor and protein kinase C (PKC, a serine/threonine kinase), (b) induced stronger inhibition of growth stimulated with EGF than of growth stimulated with platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) or fetal bovine serum (FBS). Despite the EGFR specificity of SMA41, there was an absence of a linear correlation between the EGFR status of our solid tumor cell lines and levels of DNA damage induced by the alkylating component. Similarly, EGFR levels did not correlate with IC(50) values. The antiproliferative activities of SMA41 correlated more with the AGT status of these cells and paralleled those of the clinical triazene temozolomide (TEM). However, throughout the panel, tumor cell sensitivity to SMA41 was consistently stronger than to its closest analogue TEM. Experiments performed with the isogenic cells showed that SMA41 was capable of inducing twofold higher levels of DNA damage in the EGFR transfectant and delayed cell entry to G(2)/M in both cell types. When the cells were starved and growth-stimulated with FBS (conditions under which both cell types were growth-stimulated), in contrast to TEM, SMA41 and its hydrolytic metabolite SMA52 exhibited approximately nine- and threefold stronger inhibition of growth of the EGFR transfectant. CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that, in addition to its ability to induce DNA damage and cell cycle perturbations, SMA41 is capable of selectively targeting the cells with a growth advantage conferred by EGFR transfection. When compared with the monoalkyltriazene prodrug TEM, its potency may be further enhanced by its ability to hydrolyze to another signal transduction inhibitor (SMA52) plus a DNA alkylating agent that may further contribute to chemosensitivity. Thus, our new "combi-targeting" strategy may well represent a tandem approach to selectively blocking receptor tyrosine kinase-mediated growth signaling while inducing significant levels of cytotoxic DNA lesions in refractory tumors.
95	NR	12491166	Medulloblastomas represent about 25% of all pediatric intracranial neoplasms. These highly malignant tumors arise from the cerebellum, affecting mainly children between ages 5 and 15. Although the etiology of medulloblastomas has not yet been elucidated, several reports suggest that both the cellular protein insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) and the early protein of the human polyomavirus JC (JCV T antigen) may contribute to the development of these tumors. The results of this study show a potential functional cooperation between these two proteins in the process of malignant transformation. Both medulloblastoma cell lines and medulloblastoma biopsies are characterized by the abundant presence of the IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR) and its major signaling molecule, insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1). Importantly, IRS-1 is translocated to the nucleus in the presence of the JCV T antigen. Nuclear IRS-1 was detected in T antigen-positive cell lines and in T antigen-positive biopsies from patients diagnosed with medulloblastoma. The IRS-1 domain responsible for a direct JCV T antigen binding was localized within the N-terminal portion of IRS-1 molecule and the competition for IRS-1 T antigen binding by a dominant-negative mutant of IRS-1 inhibited growth and survival of JCV T antigen-transformed cells in anchorage-independent culture condition.
95	PR	12464309	Gangliosides--glycosphingolipids that contain sialic acid--are concentrated in plasma membrane lipid domains that are specialized for cell signaling. Recent evidence indicates that gangliosides have two different roles in cell signaling. They can act in cis to modulate tyrosine kinase receptor function and in trans as ligands for receptors that facilitate communication between cells. These signaling functions of gangliosides may be potential therapeutic targets in cancer, diabetes and nerve regeneration.
95	PR	12456798	Insulin stimulates signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (Stat5) activation in insulin receptor (IR)-overexpressing cell lines and in insulin target tissues of mice. Stat5b and insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) interact with the same autophosphorylation site in the IR [phosphotyrosine (pY) 972] in yeast two-hybrid assays, and the IR phosphorylates Stat5b in vitro. These data suggest that Stat5 proteins might be recruited to, and phosphorylated by, the activated IR in vivo. Nevertheless, insulin activates Janus kinases (JAKs) in IR-overexpressing cell lines and in insulin target tissues. To determine whether Stat5 proteins must be recruited to the pY972LSA motif in the IR for insulin-stimulated activation in mammalian cells, we generated and tested a series of IR mutants. The L973R/A975D mutation abolishes the ability of the IR to induce Stat5 activation, whereas IRS-1 phosphorylation is unaffected. In contrast, the N969A/P970A mutation in the IR has no effect on Stat5 activation but significantly reduces IRS-1 phosphorylation. In coimmunoprecipitation assays, insulin-stimulated Stat5 activation correlates with Stat5 recruitment to the IR. We also find that insulin stimulates tyrosine phosphorylation of JAKs that are constitutively associated with the IR. Expression of dominant-negative (DN) JAKs, the JAK inhibitor suppressor of cytokine signaling 1, or pretreatment with the JAK inhibitor, AG490, reduces, but does not eliminate, insulin-induced Stat5 activation. Expression of the appropriate pair of DN JAKs in each of the singly JAK-deficient cell lines further establishes a component of insulin-stimulated Stat5 activation that is JAK independent. This likely represents phosphorylation of Stat5 proteins by the IR, as we find that IR kinase domain phosphorylates Stat5b in vitro on Y699 as efficiently as JAK2. Increasing the concentration of Stat5 proteins in cells favors the direct phosphorylation of Stat5 by the IR kinase where the DN-JAK inhibition of insulin-stimulated Stat5 activation becomes insignificant. At physiological levels of Stat5 however, we propose that JAKs and the IR both contribute to the insulin-induced phosphorylation of Stat5.
95	DR	12447687	One of the two isoforms of the human insulin receptor (isoform A or IR-A) binds IGF-II with high affinity and is predominantly expressed in fetal tissues and malignant cells. We evaluated the biological relevance of IR-A in human myosarcoma cells. Six myosarcoma cell lines were studied. All produced high amounts of IGF-II and five of them predominantly expressed IR-A. SKUT-1 leiomyosarcoma cells, that do not express the IGF-IR, were identified as a suitable model to study the effects of IR-A in the absence of the interference of IGF-IR. In these cells, which express high levels of IR with an IR-A relative abundance of approximately 95%, IGF-II elicits biological effects exclusively via IR-A activation and IGF-I is almost ineffective. Blockade of autocrine IGF-II reduced unstimulated cell viability and migration. Although both insulin and IGF-II activate IR-A, these two ligands showed a different ability to activate different intracellular signaling pathways and to elicit different biological effects. Insulin was more potent than IGF-II in activating the PI3-K/Akt pathway and in protecting cells from apoptosis. In contrast, IGF-II was more potent than insulin in activating the Shc/ERK pathway and in stimulating cell migration. These data indicate that IGF-II sensitive IR-A is the predominant IR isoform in a variety of myosarcoma cells. In SKUT-1 leiomyoma cells this fetal IR isoform may vicariate the IGF-IR for cell response to both insulin and IGF-II. Acting on the same IR-A receptor IGF-II is more potent than insulin in stimulating cancer cell migration.
95	DR	12431980	Annexin II is secreted into the extracellular environment, where, via interactions with specific proteases and extracellular matrix proteins, it participates in plasminogen activation, cell adhesion, and tumor metastasis and invasion. However, mechanisms regulating annexin II transport across the cellular membrane are unknown. In this study, we used coimmunoprecipitation to show that Annexin-II was bound to insulin and insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) receptors in PC12 cells and NIH-3T3 cells overexpressing insulin (NIH-3T3(IR)) or IGF-1 receptor (NIH-3T3(IGF-1R)). Stimulation of insulin and IGF-1 receptors by insulin caused a temporary dissociation of annexin II from these receptors, which was accompanied by an increased amount of extracellular annexin II detected in the media of PC12, NIH-3T3(IR), and NIH-3T3(IGF-1R) cells but not in that of untransfected NIH-3T3 cells. Activation of a different growth factor receptor, the platelet-derived growth factor receptor, did not produce such results. Tyrphostin AG1024, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor of insulin and IGF-1 receptor, was shown to inhibit annexin II secretion along with reduced receptor phosphorylation. Inhibitors of a few downstream signaling enzymes including phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, pp60c-Src, and protein kinase C had no effect on insulin-induced annexin II secretion, suggesting a possible direct link between receptor activation and annexin II secretion. Immunocytochemistry revealed that insulin also induced transport of the membrane-bound form of annexin II to the outside layer of the cell membrane and appeared to promote cell aggregation. These results suggest that the insulin receptor and its signaling pathways may participate in molecular mechanisms mediating annexin II secretion.
95	PR	12414625	Insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) is a major substrate of insulin, insulin-like growth factors, and cytokine signaling and plays an important role in mediating apoptosis, cell differentiation, and cell transformation. We found that IRS-1 is constitutively activated in a variety of solid tumors, including breast cancers, leiomyomas, Wilms' tumors, rhabdomyosarcomas, liposarcomas, leiomyosarcomas, and adrenal cortical carcinomas. Blocking the constitutively activated IRS-1 signaling in breast cancer cells with a dominant-negative IRS-1, an IRS-1 with all 18 potential tyrosine-phosphorylation sites replaced by phenylalanines (F18), dramatically reduced cancer cell growth. Breast cancer cells that expressed F18 also formed smaller and far fewer colonies in soft agar culture than did the cells that did not express F18. These studies suggest that constitutive IRS-1 activation is a common phenomenon in tumors and that activated IRS-1 may present an attractive therapeutic target.
95	NR	12361723	The growth dependence of many breast cancers on oestrogen has been exploited therapeutically by oestrogen deprivation, but almost all patients eventually develop resistance largely by unknown mechanisms. Wild-type (WT) MCF-7 cells were cultured in oestrogen-deficient medium for 90 weeks in order to establish a long-term oestrogen-deprived MCF-7 (LTED) which eventually became independent of exogenous oestrogen for growth. After 15 weeks of quiescence (LTED-Q), basal growth rate increased in parallel with increasing oestrogen sensitivity. While 10(-9)M oestradiol (E2) maximally stimulated WT growth, the hypersensitive LTED (LTED-H) were maximally growth stimulated by 10(-13)M E2. By week 50, hypersensitivity was apparently lost and the cells became oestrogen independent (LTED-I), although the pure antioestrogen ICI182780 still inhibited cell growth and reversed the inhibitory effect of 10(-9)M E2 at 10(-12) to 10(-7)M. Tamoxifen (10(-7) to 10(-6)M) had a partial agonist effect on WT, but had no stimulatory effect on LTED. Whilst LTED cells have a low progesterone receptor (PgR) expression in all phases, oestrogen receptor (ER) a expression was, on average, elevated five- and seven-fold in LTED-H and LTED-I, respectively, and serine118 was phosphorylated. ERbeta expression was up-regulated and the levels of insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) remained low throughout all phases. The levels of RIP140mRNA appeared to decrease to approximately 50% of the WT message in LTED-Q and remained constant into the hypersensitive phase. No significant changes were observed in the expression of SUG-1, TIF-1 and SMRT in LTED. The overall changes in nuclear receptor interacting proteins do not appear to be involved in the hypersensitivity. Thus, the resistance of these human breast cancer cells to oestrogen-deprivation appears to be due to acquired hypersensitivity which may be explained in part by increased levels of and phosphorylated ERalpha.
95	NR	12354757	Studies in Jurkat leukemia cells have suggested that protein-tyrosine phosphatase PTPL1/FAP-1 rescues Fas-induced cell death. However, we have previously shown that this enzyme triggers 4-hydroxytamoxifen-induced growth inhibition in human breast cancer cells. The present study addresses the role of PTPL1/FAP-1 in antiestrogen-regulated apoptotic effect and insulin-like growth factor-I survival action in MCF7 cells and further identifies the impacted signaling pathway. By terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick end labeling and cytoplasmic nucleosome enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, we demonstrated that 4-hydroxytamoxifen-induced apoptosis was totally lost in PTPL1/FAP-1 antisense transfectants in which enzyme expression was abrogated, revealing the crucial role of this phosphatase in the apoptotic process in human breast cancer cells. Time-dependent expression of PTPL1/FAP-1 in MCF7 cells completely abolished the survival action of insulin-like growth factor-I. This effect occurred through a highly significant reduction in phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt pathway activation (80% reduction in phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase activity, 55% inhibition of Akt activation) accompanied by a 65% decrease in insulin receptor substrate-1 growth factor-induced tyrosine phosphorylation. These results provide the first evidence that PTPL1/FAP-1 has a key role in the apoptotic process in human breast cancer cells independent of Fas but associated with an early inhibition of the insulin receptor substrate-1/phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway. Our data therefore suggest new therapeutic routes and strengthen the importance of identifying endogenous regulators and substrates of this phosphatase in breast tumors.
95	NR	12229282	In addition to neuroendocrine abnormalities, women with polycystic ovary syndrome have insulin resistance and beta-cell dysfunction associated with a high frequency of metabolic syndrome components, such as glucose intolerance, type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM-2), dyslipidemia and a higher risk for endothelial dysfunction, haemostatic abnormalities, hypertension and cardiovascular disease. Obesity, a common finding in this disorder, plays an important role in the development of metabolic and cardiovascular disorders. Early identification of patients and prompt initiation of insulin sensitizing therapy by pharmacological agents or changes in life style such diet and exercise might improve the metabolic and endocrine abnormalities and reduce the risk of DM-2 and cardiovascular disease in these patients.
95	NR	12213853	Insulin resistance is characteristic of many patients with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). Several studies have suggested that a decrease in insulin receptor (IR) autophosphorylation is a significant component of this resistance. In this study, we have used a highly sensitive ELISA to measure IR tyrosine phosphorylation in fibroblasts from patients with PCOS and healthy control women. After the stimulation of intact fibroblasts with insulin, IR tyrosine phosphorylation in cells from the PCOS patients was decreased by approximately 40% when compared with controls. However, when IR were first immunocaptured from fibroblasts and then stimulated with insulin, neither basal nor insulin-stimulated IR autophosphorylation was different between the two groups, suggesting that a factor independent of the IR was involved. To examine the role of increased serine kinase activity in decreased IR autophosphorylation in PCOS, fibroblasts from PCOS patients were pretreated with inhibitors of serine kinases before insulin stimulation. Pretreatment with H7, a nonspecific protein kinase inhibitor, completely reversed the decrease in insulin-stimulated IR autophosphorylation. Pretreatment with H89, an inhibitor of protein kinase A, partially reversed this function, whereas pretreatment with Go6983, an inhibitor of protein kinase C, was without effect. We next studied the effects of two small molecule activators of the IR tyrosine kinase: TLK16998 and Merck L7. Both TLK16998 and Merck L7 were able to reverse the impaired insulin-stimulated IR autophosphorylation. In summary, a factor(s) extrinsic to the IR cause impaired IR signaling in fibroblasts from patients with PCOS. Reversal of the impaired IR signaling by inhibitors of serine kinase activity suggests that serine kinase-mediated pathways may be involved in the insulin resistance. Moreover, the observation that TLK16998 and Merck L7 improved IR tyrosine phosphorylation in fibroblasts from patients with PCOS suggests that specific pharmacological therapies might be developed to treat the insulin resistance in PCOS.
95	PR	12213804	In type 2 diabetes mellitus, impaired insulin signaling leads to hyperglycemia and other metabolic abnormalities. TLK19780, a non-peptide small molecule, is a new member of a novel class of anti-diabetic agents that function as activators of the insulin receptor (IR) beta-subunit tyrosine kinase. In HTC-IR cells, 20 microm TLK19780 enhanced maximal insulin-stimulated IR autophosphorylation 2-fold and increased insulin sensitivity 2-3-fold. In contrast, TLK19780 did not potentiate the action of insulin-like growth factor-1, indicating the selectivity of TLK19780 toward the IR. The predominant effect of TLK19780 was to increase the number of IR that underwent autophosphorylation. Kinetic studies indicated that TLK19780 acted very rapidly, with a maximal effect observed 2 min after addition to insulin-stimulated cells. In 3T3-L1 adipocytes, 5 microm TLK19780 enhanced insulin-stimulated glucose transport, increasing both the sensitivity and maximal responsiveness to insulin. These studies indicate that at low micromolar levels small IR activator molecules can enhance insulin action in various cultured cells and suggest that this effect is mediated by increasing the number of IR that are tyrosine-phosphorylated in response to insulin. These studies suggest that these types of molecules could be developed to treat type 2 diabetes and other clinical conditions associated with insulin resistance.
95	DR	12193537	The insulin receptor mediates a proliferative response in certain transformed cells, but little is known about its function in ovarian cancer. We used human epithelial ovarian carcinoma cell lines and lifespan-extended normal ovarian surface epithelial (OSE) cells to examine (125)I-insulin binding and mitogenic responses to insulin. All cancer cell and OSE cultures specifically bound (125)I-insulin. Except for OV202, the carcinoma lines had elevated insulin binding compared with OSE cells. All carcinoma lines except OV202 expressed insulin receptor as detected by flow cytometry and increased (3)H-thymidine incorporation or cell number in response to 0.1-10 nM insulin. Interestingly, similar concentrations of IGF-II also induced proliferation of the insulin-responsive cancer cell lines and displaced (125)I-insulin binding. Direct binding of (125)I-IGF-II to the insulin receptor was visualized by cross-linking and immunoprecipitation. Binding of IGF-II to the insulin receptor and a proliferative effect of insulin suggest the presence of insulin receptor isoform A. Real-time PCR analyses confirm that insulin receptor isoform A expression predominates over isoform B expression in the ovarian carcinoma cell lines. This report suggests that the insulin receptor may play a role in the regulation of ovarian cancer cell growth.
95	NR	12183434	Neutralization of endogenous growth factors and administration of exogenous bioactive cytokines are two distinct biological antitumor strategies that show promise for treatment of cancer patients. In this report, we provide evidence to link both strategies as an integrative approach to cancer therapy. We tested the hypothesis that proinflammatory cytokines block growth of transformed cells by inhibiting key intracellular signaling events after activation of the insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) tyrosine kinase receptor. IGF-I stimulates DNA synthesis in MCF-7 cells by 15-fold. This increase is significantly inhibited by TNF (tumor necrosis factor) -alpha at 0.1 ng/ml and is reduced by 80% at 100 ng/ml. Similarly, both IL (interleukin) -1beta and IL-6 significantly reduce the ability of IGF-I to promote DNA synthesis. Flow cytometry confirmed that all three of the cytokines inhibit IGF-I-induced DNA synthesis by preventing cells from entering the S phase of the cell cycle, leading to G(0)/G(1) arrest. Although none of the cytokines alone are cytotoxic to transformed epithelial cells in the absence of serum, TNF-alpha significantly inhibits the antiapoptotic property of IGF-I in protecting MCF-7 cells from DNA fragmentation. TNF-alpha and IL-1beta act by inhibiting the IGF-I receptor from tyrosine phosphorylating insulin receptor substrate-1 without affecting tyrosine kinase activity of the IGF-IR itself. These data support the novel idea that the major inhibitory properties of proinflammatory cytokines on growth of breast cancer cells are manifested prominently in the presence of growth factors. These data also highlight growth factor receptor adaptor molecules, such as insulin receptor substrate-1, rather than the receptors themselves as targets for antitumor therapeutic strategies.
95	NR	12173038	Congenital fibrosarcoma (CFS) and cellular mesoblastic nephroma (CMN) are pediatric spindle cell malignancies that share two specific cytogenetic abnormalities: trisomy of chromosome 11 and a t(12;15)(p13;q25) translocation. The t(12;15) rearrangement creates a transcriptionally active fusion gene that encodes a chimeric oncoprotein, ETV6-NTRK3 (EN). EN transforms NIH3T3 fibroblasts through constitutive activation of both the Ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway and the phosphatidylinositol-3'kinase (PI3K)-Akt pathway. However, the role of trisomy 11 in CFS and CMN remains unknown. In this study we demonstrate elevated expression of the chromosome 11p15.5 insulin-like growth factor 2 gene (IGF2) in CFS and CMN tumors. Moreover, we present evidence that an intact IGF signaling axis is essential for in vitro EN-mediated transformation. EN only very weakly transformed so-called R-murine fibroblasts derived from mice with a targeted disruption of the IGF1 receptor gene (IGFRI), but transformation activity was fully restored in R- cells engineered to re-express IGFRI (R+ cells). We also observed that the major IGFRI substrate, insulin-receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1), was constitutively tyrosine phosphorylated and could be co-immunoprecipitated with EN in either R- or R+ cells expressing the EN oncoprotein. IRS-1 association with Grb2 and PI3K p85, which link IGFRI to the Ras-MAPK and PI3K-Akt pathways, respectively, was enhanced in both cell types in the presence of EN. However, activation of the Ras-MAPK and PI3K-Akt pathways was markedly attenuated in EN-expressing R- cells compared to EN-transformed R+ cells. This suggests that IRS-1 may be functioning as an adaptor in EN signal transduction, but that a link to EN transformation pathways requires the presence of IGFRI. Our findings indicate that an intact IGF signaling axis is essential for EN transformation, and are consistent with a role for trisomy 11 in augmenting this pathway in EN expressing tumors.
95	NR	12154042	The breast cancer malignant phenotype is regulated by steroid hormones and peptide growth factors. We have shown previously that insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) stimulates cell motility in a metastatic cell line, MDA-231BO. In this study, we show that neutralization of IGF action by a type I IGF receptor (IGFR1) blocking antibody or neutralization of IGF-I by IGFBP-1 reduced cell motility. However, in addition to inhibiting IGF effects, IGFBP-1 also diminished basal motility. Because IGFBP-1 contains a RGD motif important in binding of fibronectin to its alpha 5 beta 1 integrin receptor, we examined the effect of inhibiting integrin function on cell motility. As expected, disruption of fibronectin-integrin interactions interrupted basal motility in MDA-231BO cells. In addition, disruption of integrin function by an alpha 5 beta 1 blocking peptide also inhibited IGF stimulation of cell motility. To determine whether integrin function could interfere with IGF signaling, we used an alpha 5 beta 1 blocking peptide to show that in MDA-231BO cells integrin occupancy appeared necessary for phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate-2 but not for IGFR1 activation. We conclude that IGFR1 and integrin action are linked in these breast cancer cells as disruption of integrin binding to its receptor influences IGF signaling pathways. Moreover, IGFBP-1 could have dual effects on cancer cell motility by disrupting both receptor systems.
95	PR	12151648	Dichloroacetate (DCA), a by-product of water chlorination, causes liver cancer in B6C3F1 mice. A hallmark response observed in mice exposed to carcinogenic doses of DCA is an accumulation of hepatic glycogen content. To distinguish whether the in vivo glycogenic effect of DCA was dependent on insulin and insulin signaling proteins, experiments were conducted in isolated hepatocytes where insulin concentrations could be controlled. In hepatocytes isolated from male B6C3F1 mice, DCA increased glycogen levels in a dose-related manner, independently of insulin. The accumulation of hepatocellular glycogen induced by DCA was not the result of decreased glycogenolysis, since DCA had no effect on the rate of glucagon-stimulated glycogen breakdown. Glycogen accumulation caused by DCA treatment was not hindered by inhibitors of extracellular-regulated protein kinase kinase (Erk1/2 kinase or MEK) or p70 kDa S6 protein kinase (p70(S6K)), but was completely blocked by the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitors, LY294002 and wortmannin. Similarly, insulin-stimulated glycogen deposition was not influenced by the Erk1/2 kinase inhibitor, PD098509, or the p70(S6K) inhibitor, rapamycin. Unlike DCA-stimulated glycogen deposition, PI3K-inhibition only partially blocked the glycogenic effect of insulin. DCA did not cause phosphorylation of the downstream PI3K target protein, protein kinase B (PKB/Akt). The phosphorylation of PKB/Akt did not correlate to insulin-stimulated glycogenesis either. Similar to insulin, DCA in the medium decreased IR expression in isolated hepatocytes. The results indicate DCA increases hepatocellular glycogen accumulation through a PI3K-dependent mechanism that does not involve PKB/Akt and is, at least in part, different from the classical insulin-stimulated glycogenesis pathway. Somewhat surprisingly, insulin-stimulated glycogenesis also appears not to involve PKB/Akt in isolated murine hepatocytes.
95	NR	12124331	Previous studies have suggested that antiestrogens inhibit MCF-7 cell proliferation by alteringthe expression or activity of components of the insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) signaling pathway, including IGF-I receptor, insulin receptor substrate 1, and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. In this report, we examine the effects of the pure antiestrogen ICI 182,780 (ICI) on various targets of IGF-I signaling in MCF-7 cells. ICI treatment led to decreases in the absolute levels of cyclin D1 and cyclin A expression, retinoblastoma protein phosphorylation, and DNA synthesis in IGF-I-treated cells. However, IGF-I retained the ability to induce these events in the presence of ICI, suggesting that ICI treatment did not completely block IGF-I signaling. Consistent with this suggestion, IGF-I-induced phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase, AKT, and insulin receptor substrate 1 was unaffected by ICI treatment. Finally, transient expression of either constitutively active phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase or AKT was unable to induce proliferation in ICI-treated MCF-7 cells. Together, these results indicate that ICI can inhibit proliferation without blocking IGF-I signaling and suggest a model in which both estrogen receptor and IGF-I signaling regulate cell cycle components and are required for MCF-7 cell proliferation.
95	PR	12118006	Herbs have been used for medicinal purposes, including the treatment of diabetes, for centuries. Plants containing flavonoids are used to treat diabetes in Indian medicine and the green tea flavonoid, epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), is reported to have glucose-lowering effects in animals. We show here that the regulation of hepatic glucose production is decreased by EGCG. Furthermore, like insulin, EGCG increases tyrosine phosphorylation of the insulin receptor and insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1), and it reduces phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene expression in a phosphoinositide 3-kinase-dependent manner. EGCG also mimics insulin by increasing phosphoinositide 3-kinase, mitogen-activated protein kinase, and p70(s6k) activity. EGCG differs from insulin, however, in that it affects several insulin-activated kinases with slower kinetics. Furthermore, EGCG regulates genes that encode gluconeogenic enzymes and protein-tyrosine phosphorylation by modulating the redox state of the cell. These results demonstrate that changes in the redox state may have beneficial effects for the treatment of diabetes and suggest a potential role for EGCG, or derivatives, as an antidiabetic agent.
95	PR	12112020	The 68 kDa Src substrate associated during mitosis (Sam68) is an RNA binding protein with Src homology (SH) 2 and 3 domain binding sites. We have recently found that Sam68 is a substrate of the insulin receptor (IR) that translocates from the nucleus to the cytoplasm and that Tyr-phosphorylated Sam68 associates with the SH2 domains of p85 PI3K and GAP, in vivo and in vitro. In the present work, we have further demonstrated the cytoplasmic localization of Sam68, which is increased in cells overexpressing IR. Besides, we sought to further study the association of Sam68 with the Ras-GAP pathway by assessing the interactions with SH3 domains of Grb2. We employed GST-fusion proteins containing the SH3 domains of Grb2 (N or C), and recombinant Sam68 for in vitro studies. In vivo studies of protein-protein interaction were assessed by co-immunoprecipitation experiments with specific antibodies against Sam68, GAP, Grb2, SOS, and phosphotyrosine; and by affinity precipitation with the fusion proteins (SH3-Grb2). Insulin stimulation of HTC-IR cells promotes phosphorylation of Sam68 and its association with the SH2 domains of GAP. Sam68 is constitutively associated with the SH3 domains of Grb2 and it does not change upon insulin stimulation, but Sam68 is Tyr-phosphorylated and promotes the association of GAP with the Grb2-SOS complex. In vitro studies with fusion proteins showed that Sam68 association with Grb2 is preferentially mediated by the C-terminal SH3 domains of Grb2. In conclusion, Sam68 is a substrate of the IR and may have a role as a docking protein in IR signaling, recruiting GAP to the Grb2-SOS complex, and in this way it may modulate Ras activity.
95	NR	12089937	PCOS is the most frequent endocrine disorder of premenopausal women. The common clinical signs of PCOS are hirsutism, menstrual irregularities with chronic anovulation and a trend toward overweight or obesity. Diagnosis is based upon high plasma levels of androgens and the ultrasound image of polycystic ovaries. The high prevalence of PCOS at first degree female relatives suggest an important genetic component of this syndrome. Linking studies in sisters presenting phenotypical traits of PCOS and in their parents allowed the investigation of certain candidate genes presumed to be involved in the physiopathology of PCOS. The genes encoding enzymes involved in androgen synthesis, protein transducers of insulin signals and the paracrine regulating factors of gonadotrophins and ovarian function have been analysed. To date, no determinant gene mutation was reported. However, several loci were detected, especially a locus within the insulin receptor. Mutations or gene polymorphisms and their function remain to be identified. These research attempts should explain the physiopathology of PCOS and open new therapeutic perspectives. The usage of medication increasing the sensitivity to insulin action is an example of applying these particular aspects.
95	NR	12082548	In addition to acting as a hematopoietic growth factor, interleukin-4 (IL-4) inhibits growth of some transformed cells in vitro and in vivo. In this study, we show that insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-1, IRS-2, and signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6) are phosphorylated following IL-4 treatment in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. STAT6 DNA binding is enhanced by IL-4 treatment. STAT6 activation occurs even after IRS-1 depletion, suggesting the two pathways are independent. To examine the role of STAT6 in IL-4-mediated growth inhibition and apoptosis, a full-length STAT6 cDNA was transfected into MCF-7 cells. Transient overexpression of STAT6 resulted in both cytoplasmic and nuclear expression of the protein, increased DNA binding in response to IL-4, and increased transactivation of an IL-4 responsive promoter. In STAT6-transfected cells, basal proliferation was reduced whereas apoptosis was increased. Finally, stable expression of STAT6 resulted in reduced foci formation compared to vector-transfected cells alone. These results suggest STAT6 is required for IL-4-mediated growth inhibition and induction of apoptosis in human breast cancer cells.
95	NR	12060623	Medulloblastomas represent about 25% of all pediatric intracranial neoplasms. These highly malignant tumors arise from the cerebellum affecting mainly children between ages 5 and 15. Although the etiology of medulloblastomas has not yet been elucidated, several reports suggest that insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) may contribute to the development of these tumors. Results of this study show that the majority of cases examined were characterized by the abundant presence of the receptor for IGF-I (IGF-IR) protein (16 of 20 cases), and its major signaling molecule, insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1; 15 of 20). Protein levels for IGF-IR and IRS-1, determined by Western blot and immunohistochemistry, were significantly higher in medulloblastoma biopsies than in control cerebellar tissue. By immunohistochemistry, 10 of 17 biopsies examined were also positive for the anti-pY1316 antibody staining that specifically recognizes the phosphorylated (active) form of the IGF-IR. These findings correlate with the fact that phosphorylated forms of the downstream-signaling molecules Erk-1, Erk-2, and Akt/protein kinase B were found in medulloblastoma biopsies but not in control cerebellar tissue. Importantly, there is a strong inverse correlation between biopsies that are positive for anti-pY1316 and for anti-Trk-C immunoreactivity. These observations direct our attention to the IGF-IR system as a potential therapeutic target in medulloblastomas and suggest a possibility of using the anti-pY1316 antibody as a potential prognostic marker for medulloblastomas.
95	NR	12058282	We have previously established that insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I, -II and insulin exert a strong protective effect against tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF)-induced apoptosis in interferon-gamma (IFN)-sensitized HT29-D4 human colon carcinoma cells. In this study, we report that this effect was still operative when cells were cultured in the absence of integrin- and E-cadherin-mediated cell-extracellular matrix and cell-cell interactions. In this model, IGF-I did not activate the focal adhesion kinase, whereas it induced tyrosine phosphorylation of the insulin receptor substrate-1 and activation of the extracellular signal-related kinase 1 and 2, p38, phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase and protein kinase B/Akt. However, the use of specific inhibitors indicated that these pathways did not play a role in the adhesion-independent IGF-I anti-apoptotic signal. In contrast, inhibition of the NF-kappaB activation induced a complete reversal of the IGF-I anchorage-independent protective effect. Correspondingly, IGF-I markedly enhanced the TNF- and IFN/TNF-induced NF-kappaB-dependent interleukin-8 production. Our results provide evidence that IGF-I induces resistance against cytokine-induced cell death even in the absence of cell adhesion-mediated signaling. NF-kappaB appears to be a key mediator of this anti-apoptotic effect that should contribute to the resistance of colon cancer cells to immune-destruction during metastasis.
95	DR	12055235	The insulin receptor substrate (IRS) family of signaling molecules is expressed in lymphocytes, although their functions in these cells is largely unknown. To investigate the role of IRS in the protection of T cells from activation-induced cell death (AICD), we transfected the T cell hybridoma A1.1, which is IL-4 responsive but lacks expression of IRS family members with cDNA encoding IRS1 or IRS2. Stimulation of these clones with immobilized anti-CD3-induced expression of CD69 to the same level as the parental A1.1 cells. However, the A1.1 IRS1-expressing cells were markedly resistant to AICD, while the A1.1 IRS2-expressing cells were not. Inhibition of phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase in the A1.1 IRS1-expressing cells did not abrogate their resistance to AICD. Fas mRNA was induced similarly by anti-CD3 in A1.1, A1.1 IRS1-expressing, and A1.1 IRS2-expressing cells. However, induction of Fas ligand (FasL) mRNA and functional FasL protein was delayed and decreased in IRS1-expressing cells, but not in IRS2-expressing cells. The induction of transcription from a 500-bp FasL promoter and a minimal 16-mer early growth response element linked to luciferase was also impaired in the IRS1-expressing cells. These results suggest that overexpression of IRS1, but not IRS2, protects A1.1 cells from AICD by diminishing FasL transcription through a pathway that is independent of the tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS1 and phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase activity.
95	NR	12037643	PURPOSE: A majority of prospective studies show breast cancer risk to be higher in obese postmenopausal women with upper abdominal adiposity than in those with overall adiposity. The evidence is more limited and inconsistent in the case of premenopausal women. The review examines evidence that aberrant insulin signalling may be involved in the promotion of mammary carcinogenesis. The aetiology and concomitants of abdominal visceral obesity are examined. MECHANISMS: Clinical and experimental evidence suggests that the higher breast cancer risk associated with greater abdominal visceral obesity may be related to aberrant insulin signalling through the insulin receptor substrate 1 pathway, leading to insulin resistance, hyperinsulinaemia and increased concentrations of endogenous oestrogen and androgen. The putative role of aberrant insulin signalling in the promotion of mammary carcinogenesis may help to explain clinical relationships between breast cancer risk and age at menarche, pregnancies and onset of obesity. CONCLUSION: Overall adiposity in women adversely affects breast cancer risk mainly by greater exposure of mammary epithelial tissue to endogenous oestrogen. Upper abdominal adiposity appears to involve an additional effect related to the presence of insulin resistance. Aetiological factors in the development of hyperinsulinaemic insulin resistance are still uncertain but may involve aberrant susceptibility genes in adipocyte insulin receptors or in the insulin receptor substrate 1 pathway. Epigenetic factors are also likely to contribute, including high free fatty acid levels and obesity. Dietary fatty acids, particularly polyunsaturated fatty acids, are known to regulate adipocyte differentiation through the nuclear peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma, and may also have a role in insulin resistance. These aetiological factors are likely to be relevant to the high risk of postmenopausal breast cancer in industrialised Western populations.
95	DR	12012234	Recent studies have demonstrated that insulin receptor (Inr) signalling plays an important role in determining organ size and maintaining proportionality in normal animals. However, it is unclear whether the activity of this pathway in a developing organ is invariably a dominant determinant of its mass or whether size can be restricted by other non-autonomous growth regulatory mechanisms if a tissue starts to outgrow the rest of the body. To test this in Drosophila, we induced excess Inr-dependent growth by removal of the Inr signalling antagonist, DPTEN, in the eyes of flies with dramatically different body sizes. Although our data suggest a very limited level of growth competition between organs in animals with giant eyes, there do not appear to be mechanisms by which neighbouring structures substantially inhibit eye overgrowth, even when the resulting organ is many times enlarged relative to the rest of the animal. Overall, our results support a simple model in which organs are normally maintained in proportion to each other, primarily because they all respond similarly to levels of insulin-like factors and other growth regulators. Given the evolutionarily conserved role of insulin receptor signalling in growth control, our data may also help to explain why this pathway is so frequently hyperactivated in mammalian tumours.
95	NR	11978177	The gaseous messenger nitric oxide (NO) contributes to biological effects of oestrogen in target tissues, including reproductive organs, bone, cardiovascular and central nervous systems. Vasodilation and anti-atherosclerotic properties of NO have been shown to play a role in these effects. The possibility that NO acts also through regulation of the signal transduction cascade triggered by oestrogen, instead, has never been investigated. To study this we have used the MCF-7 human breast cancer cell line, an established model for oestrogen signalling. Exposure of these cells to 17-beta-oestradiol (E(2)) in the presence of NO gave rise to activation of signalling events additional to those triggered by E(2) alone, namely tyrosine phosphorylation of specific proteins, including the insulin receptor substrate-1, with recruitment to this adapter of the phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase and persistent activation of Akt (protein kinase B). Active Akt, in turn, prevented E(2) from activating p42/44 extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK 1/2). These effects of NO, which were mediated through generation of cyclic GMP and activation of the cGMP-dependent protein kinase I, initiated in the first minutes after administration of oestrogen. The consequences, however, were long lasting, as modulation of Akt and ERK 1/2 activities by NO was responsible for inhibition of E(2)-triggered cell growth and regulation of oestrogen responsive-element dependent gene transcription. Generation of NO is stimulated by both E(2) and growth factors known to contribute to the complex network of intracellular events regulating the biological actions of oestrogen. It is conceivable, therefore, that modulation by NO of E(2) early signalling, here described for the first time, has broad significance in regulating cellular responses to the hormone.
95	DR	11964397	The insulin receptor and insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-1R), activated by their ligands, control metabolism, cell survival, and proliferation. Although the signaling pathways activated by these receptors are well characterized, regulation of their activity is poorly understood. To identify regulatory proteins we undertook a two-hybrid screen using the IGF-1R beta-chain as bait. This screen identified Receptor for Activated C Kinases (RACK1) as an IGF-1R-interacting protein. RACK1 also interacted with the IGF-1R in fibroblasts and MCF-7 cells and with endogenous insulin receptor in COS cells. Interaction with the IGF-1R did not require tyrosine kinase activity or receptor autophosphorylation but did require serine 1248 in the C terminus. Overexpression of RACK1 in either R+ fibroblasts or MCF-7 cells inhibited IGF-1-induced phosphorylation of Akt, whereas it enhanced phosphorylation of Erks and Jnks. Src, the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, and SHP-2 were all associated with RACK1 in these cells. Interestingly, the proliferation of MCF-7 cells was enhanced by overexpression of RACK1, whereas IGF-1-mediated protection from etoposide killing was greatly reduced. Altogether the data indicate that RACK1 is an IGF-1R-interacting protein that can modulate receptor signaling and suggest that RACK1 has a particular role in regulating Akt activation and cell survival.
95	NR	11884618	The insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) receptor (IGF-IR) is known to regulate a variety of cellular processes including cell proliferation, cell survival, cell differentiation, and cell transformation. IRS-1 and Shc, substrates of the IGF-IR, are known to mediate IGF-IR signaling pathways such as those of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), which are believed to play important roles in some of the IGF-IR-dependent biological functions. We used the cytoplasmic domain of IGF-IR in a yeast two-hybrid interaction trap to identify IGF-IR-interacting molecules that may potentially mediate IGF-IR-regulated functions. We identified RACK1, a WD repeat family member and a Gbeta homologue, and demonstrated that RACK1 interacts with the IGF-IR but not with the closely related insulin receptor (IR). In several types of mammalian cells, RACK1 interacted with IGF-IR, protein kinase C, and beta1 integrin in response to IGF-I and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate stimulation. Whereas most of RACK1 resides in the cytoskeletal compartment of the cytoplasm, transformation of fibroblasts and epithelial cells by v-Src, oncogenic IR or oncogenic IGF-IR, but not by Ros or Ras, resulted in a significantly increased association of RACK1 with the membrane. We examined the role of RACK1 in IGF-IR-mediated functions by stably overexpressing RACK1 in NIH 3T3 cells that expressed an elevated level of IGF-IR. RACK1 overexpression resulted in reduced IGF-I-induced cell growth in both anchorage-dependent and anchorage-independent conditions. Overexpression of RACK1 also led to enhanced cell spreading, increased stress fibers, and increased focal adhesions, which were accompanied by increased tyrosine phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase and paxillin. While IGF-I-induced activation of IRS-1, Shc, PI3K, and MAPK pathways was unaffected, IGF-I-inducible beta1 integrin-associated kinase activity and association of Crk with p130(CAS) were significantly inhibited by RACK1 overexpression. In RACK1-overexpressing cells, delayed cell cycle progression in G(1) or G(1)/S was correlated with retinoblastoma protein hypophophorylation, increased levels of p21(Cip1/WAF1) and p27(Kip1), and reduced IGF-I-inducible Cdk2 activity. Reduction of RACK1 protein expression by antisense oligonucleotides prevented cell spreading and suppressed IGF-I-dependent monolayer growth. Our data suggest that RACK1 is a novel IGF-IR signaling molecule that functions as a positive mediator of cell spreading and contact with extracellular matrix, possibly through a novel IGF-IR signaling pathway involving integrin and focal adhesion signaling molecules.
95	NR	11861505	Aurintricarboxylic acid (ATA), a polymeric carboxylated triphenylmethane derivate, prevents apoptotic death in a variety of cell systems. Recently, we have shown that the survival promoting effect of ATA is transduced via activation of the IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR) signaling pathway. In breast cancer MDA-231 cells exposed either to the protein synthesis inhibitors cycloheximide or ricin or to the anticancer drug adriamycin, we have found that ATA, but not IGF-1, is a powerful antiapoptotic agent. The purpose of this study was to compare the ability of ATA and IGF-I to activate the IGF-IR signaling cascade and to correlate this ability to their survival potency. MDA-231 cells were exposed to ATA or IGF-I, up to 7 h, and the dynamics of activation of the IGF-IR signaling cascade was evaluated. Our results show that: 1) The amount of tyrosine phosphorylated IGF-IR proteins was greater after exposure to ATA, compared with IGF-I. 2) Two phosphorylated IGF-IR beta-subunits (a 95-kDa and a 75-kDa) were induced after exposure to ATA, whereas IGF-1 induced only the 95-kDa form. Immunoprecipitation of both receptor forms by antibodies against the alpha-subunit and against the carboxy terminus of the beta-subunit of the IGF-IR suggests that the 75-kDa form could be the beta-chain truncated at the amino terminus above the alpha-beta disulphide bridges. 3) The ATA-activated IGF-IR forms underwent slow dephosphorylation, compared with a rapid dephosphorylation of the IGF-I activated receptor. 4) The insulin receptor substrate-1/2-associated PI3K, Shc proteins, and the kinases Akt and Erk1/2, downstream mediators of the antiapoptotic signaling by IGF-IR, were activated to a higher extent and for a longer time period by ATA, compared with IGF-I. Taken together, the sustained activation of the IGF-IR signaling pathway by ATA may explain its stronger antiapoptotic effect. We suggest that this enhanced activity, and the different susceptibility of the IGF-IR to certain proteases and phosphatases, may indicate a distinct conformation of the ATA-activated IGF-IR.
95	NR	11834135	There is extensive experimental evidence that sex steroids and insulin interact in their actions on tissues. At physiological levels, testosterone and oestradiol are thought to be involved in maintaining normal insulin sensitivity. However, outside this 'physiological window' these steroids may promote insulin resistance. Considerable research has been carried out on polycystic ovarian syndrome, a common disorder associated with excessive androgen production and insulin resistance. Hyperinsulinaemia in patients with this condition is believed to stimulate ovarian androgen production, and there is also evidence that androgens act directly on peripheral tissues to promote insulin resistance. There is the potential for a vicious circle to develop with increasing androgen production and insulin resistance. The molecular basis of this insulin resistance has been reported to involve reduced insulin receptor autophosphorylation, reduced expression and translocation of insulin-responsive glucose transporters and defects of the insulin signalling pathway distal to the insulin receptor. These defects await full characterization. Insulin-sensitizing agents can reverse many of the effects of insulin resistance and may have a future place in the treatment of polycystic ovarian syndrome and other conditions associated with steroid-induced insulin resistance. Recognition and treatment of sex steroid-associated insulin resistance at an early stage in patients may reduce their risk of developing Type II (non-insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus, hypertension and dyslipidaemia, and so may improve fertility and reduce cardiovascular risk. Here we review the interplay between sex steroids and insulin resistance, and consider the implications this has for clinical conditions.
95	NR	11787441	NA
95	NR	11786376	IGF-I expression has been observed in human uterine leiomyomas. To examine whether autocrine IGF-I signaling plays a role in the growth of these tumors, we used an animal model of uterine leiomyoma (the Eker rat) to investigate regulation of IGF-I and the IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR) expression in tumors and normal myometrium. During the normal estrous cycle, myometrial IGF-I expression peaked on the day of proestrus when the rate of proliferation in this tissue is greatest. In leiomyomas, the expression of IGF-I was increased 7.5-fold compared with the age-matched normal tissue. The level of IGF-IR mRNA in both tumor and non-tumor tissues was found to inversely correlate with that of IGF-I. Changes observed in IGF-I signaling components correlated with the activation state of the signal-transducing protein insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1). During diestrus and proestrus when IGF-I levels were increasing, tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1 was increased up to 5.7-fold in the normal myometrium relative to estrus, when IGF-I levels were the lowest. Additionally, IRS-1 phosphorylation was 4-fold greater in leiomyomas relative to age-matched normal myometrium. Autocrine stimulation of the IGF-IR may, therefore, play a role in regulating the normal growth of the myometrium, and dysregulation of IGF-I signaling could contribute to the neoplastic growth of uterine leiomyomas.
95	NR	11751437	It is well established that 85-90% of chemically induced mammary tumors in rats will disappear or diminish significantly in size after the ovaries are removed from the animal. However, it is less well established whether a high percentage of these mammary tumors will grow back with prolonged time after ovariectomy. It is also not known what changes in gene expression take place in the tumors as they develop an independence from hormones for growth. This study was carried out to investigate this. Virgin, 50-day-old female Sprague-Dawley rats were injected with N-methyl-N-nitrosourea (MNU) at the dose of 50 mg MNU/kg body wt. When at least one mammary tumor had grown to 1.0-1.5 cm in one dimension, the animal was bilaterally ovariectomized and reduction and then re-growth of the tumors monitored. Control animals were treated identically except they were not ovariectomized when tumors appeared. Re-growths and new tumors and tumors that developed in the control rats were removed when they reached 1.0-1.5 cm in diameter and all animals were killed 25 weeks after the MNU injection. All the animals in the study (100%) developed mammary tumors after MNU injection with an average latency of 56.5 days. After ovariectomy, 93% of the tumors showed 50% or more reduction in size and 76% of the tumors could not be detected by palpation. However, in 96% of the animals where tumor reduction or disappearance occurred, a re-growth or new mammary tumor development took place with an average latency period of 52.8 days from the day of ovariectomy. Of these post-ovariectomy tumors, 36% occurred at a location where tumors had developed prior to ovariectomy, but 64% appeared at new locations. The circulating levels of 17beta-estradiol (E2) was undetectable in the ovariectomized (OVX) rats and significant reduction was seen in the serum concentrations of progesterone (P4), prolactin (PRL), growth hormone (GH) and insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I). The tumors from the OVX rats showed indications of progression as evident from loss of differentiation and invasive characteristics. Comparison between tumors from OVX and intact rats revealed a significantly increased expression of P450 aromatase and elevated activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 and 2, but reduced levels of the progesterone receptor and cyclin D1 in OVX rats. However, the estrogen receptor (ER) content remained similar in tumors from both groups, at least at the protein level, and so did the expression of IGF-I, IGF-II, insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS1), IRS-2 and epidermal growth factor receptor. IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR) and ErbB-2 were expressed, respectively, in 50 and 70% of the tumors from the OVX animals, whereas these genes were expressed in 100% of the tumors from the intact rats. It is concluded that chemically induced rat mammary tumors may still depend on the ER and local syntheses of E2 and growth factors for growth initially after ovariectomy. However, as these tumors progress, they develop a more aggressive phenotype and lose their dependency on the ER and possibly growth factors.
95	PR	11750072	The underlying neurochemical changes contributing to prion-induced neurodegeneration remain largely unknown. This study shows that scrapie infection induced a 2-fold increase of insulin receptor (IR) protein and aberrantly processed IR beta-chain in scrapie-infected N2a neuroblastoma cells (ScN2a) as measured by Western blot of immunoprecipitated IR, in the absence of increased IR mRNA. Elevated IR protein level was further confirmed in an independently scrapie-infected neuroblastoma cell line N1E-115 (ScN1E-115). Proliferation studies showed that the increased IR level in ScN2a did not result in an increased insulin-mediated cell growth compared to normal N2a cells. Binding studies indicated that this apparent paradox was due to a 65% decrease in specific [(125)I]insulin binding sites in ScN2a when compared to the amount of immunoreactive IR, although the IR binding affinity was unchanged. Analysis of insulin stimulated IR tyrosine phosphorylation showed a slight but not significant reduction in ScN2a, when related to the increased level of immunoreactive IR. However, comparing the IR tyrosine phosphorylation to the loss of binding sites in ScN2a, we demonstrated an increased IR tyrosine phosphorylation of the remaining functional IR. In addition to these differences in IR properties, the basal extracellular signal regulated kinase-2 (ERK2) phosphorylation detected by Western blot, was significantly elevated and the insulin stimulated ERK2 phosphorylation was subsequently decreased in ScN2a. Together, these data show that scrapie infection affects the level and processing of the IR and signal transduction mediated by the IR in neuroblastoma cells, as well as induces an elevated basal ERK2 phosphorylation. Aberrant regulation of neuroprotective receptors may contribute to neurodegeneration in prion diseases.
95	NR	11709726	Motility is an important process that contributes to cancer cell spread. Growth factors are key regulators of motility in many cell types. Insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) causes SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells to undergo dynamic morphological changes, leading to the extension of lamellipodia. IGF-I stimulated lamellipodia extension requires signaling through both phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-K) and MAP kinase pathways. IGF-I, over a period of hours, stimulates SH-SY5Y and SHEP neuroblastoma cells to become more motile. While SH-SY5Y and SHEP cells use different insulin receptor substrate (IRS) isoforms to transduce signals from the IGF-I receptor, IGF-I has the same relative effect on the motility of both cell lines. Blocking the PI3-K and MAP kinase pathways attenuates the ability of IGF-I to increase motility. Overexpression of PTEN also attenuates IGF-I mediated motility. These results delineate some of the proximal events in the signaling mechanism utilized by IGF-I to stimulate cell motility.
95	PR	11724768	Ghrelin was identified in the stomach as an endogenous ligand specific for the growth hormone secretagogue receptor (GHS-R). GHS-R is found in various tissues, but its function is unknown. Here we show that GHS-R is found in hepatoma cells. Exposure of these cells to ghrelin caused up-regulation of several insulin-induced activities including tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1), association of the adapter molecule growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 with IRS-1, mitogen-activated protein kinase activity, and cell proliferation. Unlike insulin, ghrelin inhibited Akt kinase activity as well as up-regulated gluconeogenesis. These findings raise the possibility that ghrelin modulates insulin activities in humans.
95	PR	11716532	Insulin regulates the expression of several hepatic genes. Although the general definition of insulin signaling has progressed dramatically, the elucidation of the complete signaling pathway from insulin receptor to transcription factors involved in the regulation of a specific gene remains to be established. In fact, recent works suggest that multiple divergent insulin signaling pathways regulate the expression of distinct genes. 5-Aminolevulinate synthase (ALAS) is a mitochondrial matrix enzyme that catalyzes the first and rate-limiting step of heme biosynthesis. It has been reported that insulin caused the rapid inhibition of housekeeping ALAS transcription, but the mechanism involved in this repression has not been explored. The present study investigates the role of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-kinase) and mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways in insulin signaling relevant to ALAS inhibition. To explore this, we combined the transient overexpression of regulatory proteins involved in these pathways and the use of small cell permeant inhibitors in rat hepatocytes and HepG2 cells. Wortmannin and LY294002, PI3-kinase inhibitors, as well as lovastatin and PD152440, Ras farnesylation inhibitors, and MEK inhibitor PD98059 abolished the insulin repression of ALAS transcription. The inhibitor of mTOR/p70(S6K) rapamycin had no effect whatsoever upon hormone action. The overexpression of vectors encoding constitutively active Ras, MEK, or p90(RSK) mimicked the inhibitory action of insulin. Conversely, negative mutants of PKB, Ras, or MEK impaired insulin inhibition of ALAS promoter activity. Furthermore, inhibition of one of the pathways blocks the inhibitory effect produced by the activation of the other. Our findings suggest that factors involved in two signaling pathways that are often considered to be functionally separate during insulin action, the Ras/ERK/p90(RSK) pathway and the PI3K/PKB pathway, are jointly required for insulin-mediated inhibition of ALAS gene expression in rat hepatocytes and human hepatoma cells.
95	NR	11704861	Insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) regulate breast cancer cell proliferation, protect cells from apoptosis, and enhance metastasis. In this study, we examined the IGF signaling pathway in two breast cancer cell lines selected for metastatic behavior. LCC6 was selected for growth as an ascites tumor in athymic mice from parental MDA-MB-435 cells (435P). The MDA-231BO cell line was derived from osseous metastases that formed after intracardiac injection of the MDA-MB-231 cell line in athymic mice. Compared to the parental cell lines, IGF-I treatment enhanced IRS-2 phosphorylation over IRS-1 in the metastatic variants. IGF-I stimulated cell migration in the variant cells, but not in the parental cells. To determine the role for IRS-2 in IGF-mediated motility, we transfected MDA-231BO cells with an anti-sense IRS-2 construct. Transfected cells had decreased levels of IRS-2 with diminished IGF-mediated motility and anchorage independent growth when compared to control cells. However, adherence to fibronectin was enhanced in the transfected cells compared to MDA-231BO cells. Our data show that breast cancer cells selected for metastatic behavior in vivo have increased IRS-2 activation and signaling. In these cells, IGF-I enhances cell adhesion and motility suggesting that IRS-2 may mediate these aspects of the malignant phenotype.
95	PR	11596667	AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Leptin resistance in obese humans seems to be predominantly caused by signalling abnormalities at the post receptor level. Leptin resistance in obese individuals is frequently associated with insulin resistance and pronounced hyperinsulinaemia indicating a negative crosstalk of the insulin and leptin signalling chain. METHODS: This hypothesis was tested using a cell model of peripheral leptin signalling, i. e. insulin-secreting cell lines (RINr1046-38). Mechanisms for a crosstalk between the insulin and leptin signalling pathway were also studied in rat-1 and HEK293 cells overexpressing elements of the insulin and leptin signalling chain. RESULTS: The effects of leptin on insulin secretion are completely cancelled by a 4-h preincubation with 1 nmol/l insulin, supporting the hypothesis of a negative crosstalk of insulin and leptin signalling. We investigated the potential molecular mechanisms in more detail in HEK293 cells and Rat-1 fibroblasts that overexpressed proteins of the insulin and leptin signalling chain. Leptin (60 ng/ml) stimulated autophosphorylation of JAK-2 in HEK 293 cells. This leptin effect could be inhibited by simultaneous treatment of cells with insulin. Furthermore, overexpression of the insulin receptor in HEK 293 cells clearly reduced JAK-2 phosphorylation and led further downstream to a diminished phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase activity. The inhibitory effect of the insulin signal could be partially prevented by transfection of the cells with an inactive mutant of the tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1. CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: In summary, our data suggest that the insulin receptor signalling pathway interferes with leptin signalling at the level of JAK-2. Inhibition of JAK-2 phosphorylation might occur through SHP-1-dependent pathways, indicating that hyperinsulinaemia contributes to the pathogenesis of leptin resistance.
95	NR	11559546	The insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGF-IR) is a ubiquitous and multifunctional tyrosine kinase that has been implicated in breast cancer development. In estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast tumors, the levels of the IGF-IR and its substrate, insulin-receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1), are often elevated, and these characteristics have been linked with increased radioresistance and cancer recurrence. In vitro, activation of the IGF-IR/IRS-1 pathway in ER-positive cells improves growth and counteracts apoptosis induced by anticancer treatments. The function of the IGF-IR in hormone-independent breast cancer is not clear. ER-negative breast cancer cells often express low levels of the IGF-IR and fail to respond to IGF-I with mitogenesis. On the other hand, anti-IGF-IR strategies effectively reduced metastatic potential of different ER-negative cell lines, suggesting a role of this receptor in late stages of the disease. Here we examined IGF-IR signaling and function in ER-negative MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells and their IGF-IR-overexpressing derivatives. We demonstrated that IGF-I acts as a chemoattractant for these cells. The extent of IGF-I-induced migration reflected IGF-IR levels and required the activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI-3K) and p38 kinases. The same pathways promoted IGF-I-dependent motility in ER-positive MCF-7 cells. In contrast with the positive effects on cell migration, IGF-I was unable to stimulate growth or improve survival in MDA-MB-231 cells, whereas it induced mitogenic and antiapoptotic effects in MCF-7 cells. Moreover, IGF-I partially restored growth in ER-positive cells treated with PI-3K and ERK1/ERK2 inhibitors, whereas it had no protective effects in ER-negative cells. The impaired IGF-I growth response of ER-negative cells was not caused by a low IGF-IR expression, defective IGF-IR tyrosine phosphorylation, or improper tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1. Also, the acute (15-min) IGF-I activation of PI-3 and Akt kinases was similar in ER-negative and ER-positive cells. However, a chronic (2-day) IGF-I exposure induced the PI-3K/Akt pathway only in MCF-7 cells. The reactivation of this pathway in ER-negative cells by overexpression of constitutively active Akt mutants was not sufficient to significantly improve proliferation or survival (with or without IGF-I), which indicated that other pathways are also required to support these functions. Our results suggest that in breast cancer cells, IGF-IR can control nonmitogenic processes regardless of the ER status, whereas IGF-IR growth-related functions may depend on ER expression.
95	PR	11546773	Insulin and insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) regulate metabolism and body growth through homologous receptor tyrosine kinases that phosphorylate the insulin receptor substrate (IRS) proteins. IRS-2 is an important IRS protein, as it mediates peripheral insulin action and beta-cell survival. In this study, we show that insulin, IGF-1, or osmotic stress promoted ubiquitin/proteasome-mediated degradation of IRS-2 in 3T3-L1 cells, Fao hepatoma, cells and mouse embryo fibroblasts; however, insulin/IGF-1 did not promote degradation of IRS-1 in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes or mouse embryo fibroblasts. MG132 or lactacystin, specific inhibitors of 26S proteasome, blocked insulin/IGF-1-induced degradation of IRS-2 and enhanced the detection of ubiquitinated IRS-2. Insulin/IGF1-induced ubiquitination and degradation of IRS-2 was blocked by inhibitors of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (wortmannin or LY294002) or mTOR (rapamycin). Chronic insulin or IGF-1 treatment of IRS-1-deficient mouse embryo fibroblasts inhibited IRS-2-mediated activation of Akt and ERK1/2, which was reversed by lactacystin pretreatment. By contrast, IRS-1 activation of Akt and ERK1/2 was not inhibited by chronic insulin/IGF-1 stimulation in IRS-2-deficient mouse embryo fibroblasts. Thus, we identified a novel negative feedback mechanism by which the ubiquitin/proteasome-mediated degradation of IRS-2 limits the magnitude and duration of the response to insulin or IGF-1.
95	NR	11531336	The epidermal growth factor receptor plays crucial roles throughout the development of multicellular organisms, and inappropriate activation of the receptor is associated with neoplastic transformation of many cell types. The receptor is thought to be activated by ligand-induced homodimerisation. Here, however, we show by chemical cross-linking and sucrose density-gradient centrifugation that in the absence of bound ligand the receptor has an ability to form a dimer and exists as a preformed dimer on the cell surface. We also analysed the receptor dimerisation by inserting cysteine residues at strategic positions about the putative alpha-helix axis of the extracellular juxtamembrane region. The mutant receptors spontaneously formed disulphide bridges and transformed NIH3T3 cells in the absence of ligand, depending upon the positions of the cysteine residue inserted. Kinetic analyses of the disulphide bonding indicate that EGF binding induces flexible rotation or twist of the juxtamembrane region of the receptor in the plane parallel with the lipid bilayer. The binding of an ATP competitor to the intracellular domain also induced similar flexible rotation of the juxtamembrane region. All the disulphide-bonded dimers had flexible ligand-binding domains with the same biphasic affinities for EGF as the wild-type. These results demonstrate that ligand binding to the flexible extracellular domains of the receptor dimer induce rotation or twist of the juxtamembrane regions, hence the transmembrane domains, and dissociate the dimeric, inactive form of the intracellular domains. The flexible rotation of the intracellular domains may be necessary for the intrinsic catalytic kinase to become accessible to the multiple tyrosine residues present in the regulatory domain and various substrates, and may be a common property of many cell-surface receptors, such as the insulin receptor.
95	NR	11500939	Insulin-like growth factor II (IGF-II) plays a key role in mitogenesis during development and tumorigenesis and is believed to exert its mitogenic functions mainly through the IGF-I receptor. Recently, we identified the insulin receptor isoform A (IR(A)) as an additional high affinity receptor for IGF-II in both fetal and cancer cells. Here we investigated the mitogenic signaling of IGF-II via the Akt/Glycogen synthase kinase 3 (Gsk3) axis employing R-IR(A) cells that are IGF-I receptor null mouse embryonic fibroblasts expressing the human IR(A). IGF-II induced activation of the proto-oncogenic serine kinase Akt, reaching maximal at 5-10 min. IGF-II also caused the rapid and sustained deactivation of glycogen synthase kinase 3-beta (Gsk3beta), reaching maximal at 1-3 min, shortly preceding, therefore, maximal activation of Akt. Under our conditions, IGF-II and insulin induced 70-80% inhibition of Gsk3betaactivity. In these cells IGF-II also deactivated Gsk3alpha although less effectively than Gsk3beta. In parallel experiments, we found that IGF-II induced transient activation of extracellular-signal-regulated kinases (Erk) reaching maximal at 5-10 min and decreasing thereafter. Time courses and potencies of regulation of both mitogenic pathways (Akt/Gsk3beta and Erk) by IGF-II via IR(A) were similar to those of insulin. Furthermore, IGF-II like insulin effectively stimulated cell cycle progression from the G0/G1 to the S and G2/M phases. Interestingly, AP-1-mediated gene expression, that was reported to be negatively regulated by Gsk3beta was only weakly increased after IGF-II stimulation. Our present data suggest that the coordinated activation or deactivation of Akt, Gsk3beta, and Erk may account for IGF-II mitogenic effects and support an active role for IR(A) in IGF-II action.
95	NR	11479214	Estrogen can increase insulin-like growth factor-I receptor (IGF-IR) and insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) expression, two key components of IGF-I-mediated signaling. The result is sensitization of breast cancer cells to IGF-I and synergistic growth in the presence of estrogen and IGF-I. We hypothesized that loss of estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) would result in reduced IGF-mediated signaling and growth. To test this hypothesis, we examined IGF-I effects in MCF-7 breast cancer cell sublines that have been selected for loss of ERalpha (C4 and C4-12 cells are ERalpha-negative) by long-term estrogen withdrawal. C4 and C4-12 cells had reduced IGF-IR and IRS-1 mRNA and protein expression (compared with MCF-7 cells) that was not inducible by estrogen. Furthermore, C4 and C4-12 cells showed reduced IGF-I signaling and failed to show any growth response to either estrogen or IGF-I. To prove that loss of IGF and estrogen-mediated signaling and growth was a consequence of loss of ERalpha, we re-expressed ERalpha in C4-12 cells by stable transfection with HA-tagged ERalpha. Three independent C4-12 ERalpha-HA clones expressed a functional ERalpha that (a) was down-regulated by estrogen, (b) conferred estrogen-induction of cyclin D1 expression, and (c) caused estrogen-mediated increase in the number of cells in S phase. All of the effects were completely blocked by antiestrogens. Interestingly, ERalpha-HA expression in C4-12 cells did not restore estrogen induction of progesterone receptor expression. However, ERalpha-positive C4-12 cells now exhibited estrogen-induction of IGF-IR and IRS-1 levels and responded mitogenically to both estrogen and IGF-I. These data show that ERalpha is a critical requirement for IGF signaling, and to our knowledge this is the first report of functional ERalpha expression that confers estrogen-mediated growth of an ER-negative breast cancer cell line.
95	NR	11459778	We have previously shown that hepatocytes lacking insulin receptors (Ir-/-) fail to mediate metabolic responses, such as stimulation of glycogen synthesis, while retaining the ability to proliferate in response to IGFs. In this study we have asked whether overexpression of type I IGF receptors would rescue the metabolic response of Ir-/- hepatocytes. After IGF-I stimulation, insulin receptor substrate-1 and -2 phosphorylation and PI3K activity were restored to levels similar to or greater than those seen in wild-type cells. Rates of cell proliferation in response to IGF-I increased approximately 2-fold, whereas glycogen synthesis was restored to wild-type levels, but was comparatively smaller than that elicited by overexpression of insulin receptors. In summary, overexpression of IGF-I receptors in Ir-/- hepatocytes normalized insulin receptor substrate-2 phosphorylation and glycogen synthesis to wild-type levels, whereas it increased cell proliferation above wild-type levels. Moreover, stimulation of glycogen synthesis was submaximal compared with the effect of insulin receptor overexpression. We conclude that IGF-I receptors are more efficiently coupled to cell proliferation than insulin receptors, but are less potent than insulin receptors in stimulating glycogen synthesis. The data are consistent with the possibility that there exist intrinsic signaling differences between insulin and IGF-I receptors.
95	NR	11454519	OBJECTIVE: Insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3) inhibits cell growth. Previous reports have suggested the existence of plasma membrane IGFBP-3 receptors that could mediate direct, IGF-independent effects. Thus far, however, the only well-defined putative IGFBP-3 receptor is the type V transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) receptor, a membrane glycoprotein that mediates TGF-beta-induced growth inhibition in selected cells. The aim of the study was to test whether IGFBP-3 and TGF-beta exert short-term effects in an osteosarcoma cell line that produces no IGF but contains type 1 IGF receptors. DESIGN: DNA synthesis and apoptosis in Saos-2/B-10 cells were measured in response to IGF-I, IGF-II, IGFBP-3 and TGF-beta2, and to type 1 IGF receptor ligands with poor affinity for IGFBP-3 ([QAYL]-IGF-I and insulin). RESULTS: IGF-I and IGF-II stimulated thymidine incorporation into DNA and suppressed apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner with maximal effects at 1 and 3 nM respectively. TGF-beta2 slightly increased thymidine incorporation into DNA but had no effect on apoptosis. IGFBP-3 had no effect by itself. Whereas it blocked the above effects of 1 nmol/l IGF-I, it did not block those of 1 nmol/l [QAYL]-IGF-I or 100 nmol/l insulin. CONCLUSIONS: IGFBP-3 does not affect DNA synthesis or apoptosis in an IGF-independent manner in IGF-responsive osteosarcoma cells. It therefore appears to act essentially by sequestration of IGF.
95	NR	11445579	In this study, we report on the isolation of a PDZ domain protein, here designated as IIP-1, insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) receptor-interacting protein-1, which binds to the IGF-1 receptor, but not to the related insulin receptor, and which is involved in the regulation of cell motility. The interaction between the IGF-1 receptor and IIP-1 as well as a splice variant IIP-1/p26 was demonstrated in the yeast two-hybrid system. Using co-precipitation experiments, we confirmed the interaction in transfected cells as well as in vitro. Analysis of deletion mutants indicates that the PDZ domain of IIP-1 mediates interaction with the C-terminal tail of the IGF-1 receptor (serine-threonine-cysteine). This finding demonstrates that the C terminus of the IGF-1 receptor acts as novel PDZ domain binding site. Immunofluorescence analysis revealed an overlapping localization of IIP-1 and the IGF-1 receptor in the breast cancer cell line MCF-7. A functional connection between IIP-1 and the IGF-1 receptor is further supported by the finding that the level of expression of IIP-1 and the IGF-1 receptor strongly correlates in different normal and cancer cells. Furthermore, overexpression of IIP-1 resulted in an attenuation of migration of MCF-7 cells, which is one of the biological activities mediated by the IGF-1 signaling system.
95	NR	11443175	Hyperandrogenism observed in women with a variety of insulin-resistant states is thought to be due to a stimulatory effect of insulin on ovarian steroid hormone production. However, it is not known what mechanisms could allow the ovary to remain sensitive to insulin while classical target organs for insulin action (liver, fat, and muscle) exhibit insulin resistance. One hypothesis proposed to explain this paradox suggests that a postbinding divergence of insulin receptor signaling occurs in the ovary and that signaling pathways for steroid hormone synthesis and other ovarian effects of insulin may be distinct from classical glucose signaling pathways. We now report that activation of phosphatidyl-inositol-3 (PI-3) kinase, which is crucial for glucose transport, is not necessary for the insulin-induced stimulation of progesterone production or for the insulin-induced inhibition of insulin-like growth factor binding protein 1 (IGFBP-1) production in cultured human ovarian cells. Human granulosa cells obtained during in vitro fertilization procedures were cultured with 10, 10(2), 10(3), or 10(4) ng/mL insulin with or without preincubation with 100 nM wortmannin, a specific irreversible inhibitor of PI-3 kinase. IGFBP-1 concentration in the conditioned medium was measured using immunoradiometric assay or by Western blot analysis. Progesterone concentration was measured using RIA. Additional studies were carried out in cultures of human ovarian cells prepared from homogenized whole ovarian tissue of a woman with a family history of breast cancer and a mutation of BRCA-1 gene who underwent bilateral oophorectomy. These cells were cultured with 10(3) ng/mL insulin with or without preincubation with 100 nM wortmannin. Two-way ANOVA was used to compare mean values of IGFBP-1 and progesterone according to insulin dose and the use of wortmannin. In cultured granulosa cell medium, progesterone production was stimulated by insulin in a dose-related manner up to 175% of control (P < 0.0001). In tissue culture medium from ovarian cells obtained from a patient with BRCA-gene mutation, concentration of progesterone in the tissue culture medium increased from 2.5 +/- 0.2 ng/mL for control to 5.4 +/- 0.3 ng/mL for cells incubated with insulin (P < 0.001). IGFBP-1 production in tissue culture medium from human granulosa cells was inhibited by insulin to the nadir of 45% of control (P < 0.0001). Preincubation with wortmannin, despite complete inhibition of PI-3 kinase in both cell systems confirmed by Western blot analysis, failed to significantly alter these results. We conclude that inhibition of PI-3 kinase by wortmannin fails to abolish stimulatory effect of insulin on progesterone production or inhibitory effect of insulin on IGFBP-1 production in cultured human ovarian cells. These findings suggest that activation of PI-3 kinase, an enzyme crucial for insulin-stimulated glucose transport, is not necessary for the above effects of insulin in the ovary. These data provide evidence for the presence of PI-3 kinase-independent insulin signaling pathway(s) in human ovarian cells.
95	NR	11440917	Women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) are insulin resistant secondary to a postbinding defect in insulin signaling. Sequential euglycemic glucose clamp studies at 40 and 400 mU. m(-2). min(-1) insulin doses with serial skeletal muscle biopsies were performed in PCOS and age-, weight-, and ethnicity-matched control women. Steady-state insulin levels did not differ, but insulin-mediated glucose disposal was significantly decreased in PCOS women (P < 0.05). Insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-1-associated phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3K) activity was significantly decreased in PCOS (n = 12) compared with control skeletal muscle (n = 8; P < 0.05). There was no significant difference in the abundance of IR, IRS-1, or the p85 regulatory subunit of PI 3K in PCOS (n = 14) compared with control (n = 12) muscle. The abundance of IRS-2 was significantly increased (P < 0.05) in PCOS skeletal muscle, suggesting a compensatory change. We conclude that there is a physiologically relevant defect in insulin receptor signaling in PCOS that is independent of obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus.
95	NR	11438664	Expression of the alpha6beta4 integrin increases the invasive potential of carcinoma cells by a mechanism that involves activation of phosphoinositide 3-OH kinase (PI3K). In the present study, we investigated the signaling pathway by which the alpha6beta4 integrin activates PI3K. Neither the alpha6 nor the beta4 cytoplasmic domain contains the consensus binding motif for PI3K, pYMXM, indicating that additional proteins are likely to be involved in the activation of this lipid kinase by the alpha6beta4 integrin. We identified insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) and IRS-2 as signaling intermediates in the activation of PI3K by the alpha6beta4 integrin. IRS-1 and IRS-2 are cytoplasmic adapter proteins that do not contain intrinsic kinase activity but rather function by recruiting proteins to surface receptors, where they organize signaling complexes. Ligation of the alpha6beta4 receptor promotes tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1 and IRS-2 and increases their association with PI3K, as determined by coimmunoprecipitation. Moreover, we identified a tyrosine residue in the cytoplasmic domain of the beta4 subunit, Y1494, that is required for alpha6beta4-dependent phosphorylation of IRS-2 and activation of PI3K in response to receptor ligation. Most importantly, Y1494 is essential for the ability of the alpha6beta4 integrin to promote carcinoma invasion. Taken together, these results imply a key role for the IRS proteins in the alpha6beta4-dependent promotion of carcinoma invasion.
95	NR	11423472	Impairment of the fibrinolytic system, caused primarily by increases in the plasma levels of plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI) type 1, are frequently found in diabetes and the insulin-resistance syndrome. Among the factors responsible for the increases of PAI-1, insulin has recently attracted attention. In this study, we analyzed the effects of insulin on PAI-1 biosynthesis in HepG2 cells, paying particular attention to the signaling network evoked by this hormone. Experiments performed in CHO cells overexpressing the insulin receptor indicate that insulin increases PAI-1 gene transcription through interaction with its receptor. By using inhibitors of the different signaling pathways evoked by insulin-receptor binding, it has been shown that the biosynthesis of PAI-1 is due to phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3-kinase activation, followed by protein kinase C and ultimately by mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase activation and extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 phosphorylation. We also showed that this pathway is Ras-independent. Transfection of HepG2 cells with several truncations of the PAI-1 promoter coupled to a CAT gene allowed us to recognize two major response elements located in the regions between -804 and -708 and between -211 and -54. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay identified three binding sites for insulin-induced factors, all colocalized with putative Sp1 binding sites. Using supershifting antibodies, the binding of Sp1 could only be confirmed at the binding site located just upstream from the transcription start site of the PAI-1 promoter. A construct comprising four tandem repeat copies of the -93/-62 region of the PAI-1 promoter linked to CAT was transcriptionally activated in HepG2 cells by insulin. These results outline the central role of MAP kinase activation in the regulation of PAI-1 induced by insulin.
95	NR	11409918	A property of signal transduction pathways that might explain their efficiency and specificity is the formation of signaling complexes. The recent demonstration that adaptor proteins can interact with many components of the extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERKs) signaling cascade leads us to investigate whether such complexes may include the transmembrane receptor. The present work shows that in human hepatoma Hep3B cells, insulin receptor (IR) can be coimmunoprecipitated with other components of the ERKs cascade: insulin receptor substrate (IRS), Raf-1, and ERKs. Furthermore, these complexes formed near the cytoplasmic membrane even prior to insulin stimulation.
95	NR	11390373	Exogenous administration of eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) improves insulin sensitivity, but its precise mechanism remains unknown. Here we show that EPA stimulates the intracellular insulin signaling pathway in hepatoma cells. Exposure of these cells to EPA caused up-regulation of several insulin-induced activities including tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate-1, insulin receptor substrate-1-associated phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, and its downstream target Akt kinase activity as well as down-regulation of gluconeogenesis. In contrast, EPA decreased mitogen-activated protein kinase activity and inhibited cell proliferation. These findings raise the possibility that EPA up-regulates metabolic action of insulin and inhibits cell growth in humans.
95	NR	11384880	The 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/Delta5-Delta4 isomerase (3beta-HSD) isoenzymes catalyze an essential step in the formation of all classes of active steroid hormones. We have recently shown that 3beta-HSD type 1 gene expression is specifically induced by interleukin (IL)-4 and IL-13 in several human cancer cell lines and in normal human mammary and prostatic epithelial cells in primary culture. There is evidence that IL-4 stimulates bifurcating signaling pathways in which the Stat6-signal pathway is involved in differentiation and gene regulation, whereas insulin receptor substrate (IRS) proteins mediate the mitogenic action of IL-4. As a matter of fact, we have shown that IL-4-activated Stat6 in all cell lines studied, where IL-4 induced 3beta-HSD type 1 expression but not in those cell lines that failed to respond to IL-4. The mechanism of the induction of 3beta-HSD type 1 gene expression was further characterized in ZR-75-1 human breast cancer cells. We have also found that IL-4 rapidly induced IRS-1 and IRS-2 phosphorylation in these cell lines. Moreover, insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1 and insulin, which are well known to cause IRS-1 and IRS-2 phosphorylation, increased the stimulatory effect of IL-4 on 3beta-HSD activity. IRS-1 and IRS-2 are adapter molecules that provide docking sites for different SH2 domain-containing proteins, leading to the activation of multiple pathways, such as the phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3-kinase and the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) pathways. The inhibition of IL-4-induced 3beta-HSD expression by PI 3-kinase inhibitors (wortmannin and LY294002) as well as an inhibitor of MAP kinase activation (PD98059), indicates the involvement of those pathways in this response to IL-4. Wortmannin also blocked MAP kinase activation by IL-4, insulin and IGF-1 suggesting that the MAP kinase cascade acts as a downstream effector of PI 3-kinases. Furthermore, we showed that the PKC activator phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA) also potentiated the IL-4-induced 3beta-HSD activity, thus suggesting that one signaling molecule that is involved in the signal transduction of the IL-4 action on 3beta-HSD type 1 expression is also a substrate for PKC. Taken together, these findings suggest the existence of a novel mechanism of gene regulation by IL-4. This mechanism would involve in the phosphorylation of IRS-1 and IRS-2, which transduce the IL-4 signal through a PI 3-kinase- and MAP kinase-dependent signaling pathway. However, the inability of IGF-1, insulin and PMA to stimulate 3beta-HSD type 1 expression by themselves in the absence of IL-4 indicates that the multiple pathways downstream of IRS-1 and IRS-2 must act in cooperation with an IL-4-specific signaling molecule, such as the transcription factor Stat6. It is also of interest to note that there also appear to be differences between the regulation of the 3beta-HSD type 1 and type 2 promoters.
95	NR	11376126	In MCF-7 breast cancer cells, the insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-1R) and the oestrogen receptor (ER) are coexpressed and the two signalling systems are engaged in a crosstalk that results in synergistic growth. However, coupling between the signalling cascades is poorly understood. Oestradiol enhances IGF-1R signalling by inducing the expression of insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1), a substrate of the IGF-1R. Oestradiol induced expression of IRS-1 results in enhanced tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1 after IGF-1 stimulation, followed by enhanced mitogen activated protein kinase, phosphoinositide 3' kinase, and Akt activation. Oestradiol can also potentiate the effect of IGF-1 on the expression of cyclin D1 and cyclin E, and on the phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein (RB). These effects are greatly diminished in SX13 cells, which exhibit a 50% reduction in IGF-1R expression but few functional IGF-1Rs at the surface. Oestradiol and IGF-1 regulate the expression of two cyclin dependent kinase inhibitors, p21 and p27, differently. Whereas IGF-1 increases p21 expression and reduces p27 expression, oestradiol has no effect on p21. In summary, in MCF-7 cells, oestrogen potentiates the effect of IGF-1 on IGF-1R signalling and its effects on certain cell cycle components.
95	NR	11376124	Deregulation of the insulin-like growth factor (IGF) axis, including the autocrine production of IGFs, IGF binding proteins (IGFBPs), IGFBP proteases, and the expression of the IGF receptors, has been identified in the development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Characteristic alterations detected in HCC and hepatoma cell lines comprise the increased expression of IGF-II and the IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR), which have emerged as crucial events in malignant transformation and the growth of tumours. Alterations of IGFBP production and the proteolytic degradation of IGFBPs resulting in an excess of bioactive IGFs, as well as the defective function of the IGF degrading IGF-II/mannose 6-phosphate receptor (IGF-II/M6PR), may further potentiate the mitogenic effects of IGFs in the development of HCC.
95	NR	11376123	The type 1 insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF-IR) sends several signals, some of which are contradictory. When the concentrations of insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1), a major substrate of the IGF-IR, are high, the signal is mitogenic, anti-apoptotic, and can even cause malignant transformation. However, in the absence of IRS-1, the IGF-IR sends a differentiation signal, which leads to granulocytic differentiation in haemopoietic cells. The mitogenic signal of the IGF-IR/IRS-1 combination depends largely, but not exclusively, on the activation of the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K).
95	NR	11376121	In recent years, the activation of the insulin-like growth factor (IGF) system in cancer has emerged as a key factor for tumour progression and resistance to apoptosis. Therefore, a variety of strategies have been developed to block the type I IGF receptor (IGF-I-R), which is thought to mediate the biological effects of both IGF-I and IGF-II. However, recent data suggest that the IGF signalling system is complex and that other receptors are involved. To unravel the complexity of the IGF system in thyroid cancer, IGF-I and IGF-II production, and the expression and function of their cognate receptors were studied. Both IGFs were found to be locally produced in thyroid cancer: IGF-I by stromal cells and IGF-II by malignant thyrocytes. Values were significantly higher in malignant tissue than in normal tissue. IGF-I-Rs were overexpressed in differentiated papillary carcinomas but not in poorly differentiated or undifferentiated tumours, whereas insulin receptors (IRs) were greatly overexpressed in all tumour hystotypes, with a trend for higher values in dedifferentiated tumours. As a consequence of IR overexpression, high amounts of IR/IGF-I-R hybrids (which bind IGF-I with high affinity) were present in all thyroid cancer histotypes. Because of recent evidence that isoform A of IR (IR-A) is a physiological receptor for IGF-II in fetal life, the relative abundance of IR-A in thyroid cancer was measured. Preliminary data indicate that overexpressed IRs mainly occur as IR-A in thyroid cancer. These data indicate that both IR/IGF-I-R hybrids and IR-A play an important role in the overactivation of the IGF system in thyroid cancer and in IGF-I mitogenic signalling in these tumours. J Clin PATHOL: Mol Pathol
95	NR	11374898	SH3P12/CAP/ponsin, a gene product with a sorbin homology domain and three consecutive SH3 domains in the carboxy-terminus, has been isolated from murine adipocytes and identified as an important adaptor during insulin signaling. Here we describe the cloning, mapping, and expression of the human homologue, termed SORBS1 (sorbin and SH3 domain containing 1). Multiple transcripts of this gene with different mRNA isoforms were observed among different tissues. Here we report 13 alternatively spliced exons, which were ascertained from the full-length cDNA cloned in adipose, liver, and skeletal muscle tissues. Among the major isoforms, the shortest, 2223-bp, open reading frame (ORF) encodes a protein with a predicted molecular weight of 81.5 kDa, while the longest, 3879-bp, ORF encodes a protein of about 142.2 kDa. This gene was mapped to human chromosome 10q23.3-q24.1, which is a candidate region for insulin resistance found in Pima Indians. In human hepatoma Hep3B cells, SORBS1 was partly dissociated from the insulin receptor complex and bound to c-Abl protein upon insulin stimulation. This interaction with c-Abl was through the third SH3 domain and a possible conformational change of SORBS1 induced by insulin. Our data suggest that c-Abl oncoprotein via SORBS1 might play a role in the insulin signaling pathway.
95	NR	11359902	PTEN is a tumor suppressor that antagonizes phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K) by dephosphorylating the D3 position of phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-triphosphate (PtdIns-3,4,5-P3). Given the importance of PTEN in regulating PtdIns-3,4,5-P3 levels, we used Affymetrix GeneChip arrays to identify genes regulated by PTEN. PTEN expression rapidly reduced the activity of Akt, which was followed by a G(1) arrest and eventually apoptosis. The gene encoding insulin receptor substrate 2 (IRS-2), a mediator of insulin signaling, was found to be the most induced gene at all time points. A PI3K-specific inhibitor, LY294002, also upregulated IRS-2, providing evidence that it was the suppression of the PI3K pathway that was responsible for the message upregulation. In addition, PTEN, LY294002, and rapamycin, an inhibitor of mammalian target of rapamycin, caused a reduction in the molecular weight of IRS-2 and an increase in the association of IRS-2 with PI3K. Apparently, PTEN inhibits a negative regulator of IRS-2 to upregulate the IRS-2-PI3K interaction. These studies suggest that PtdIns-3,4,5-P3 levels regulate the specific activity and amount of IRS-2 available for insulin signaling.
95	NR	11297536	The insulin signaling pathway is activated by tyrosine phosphorylation of the insulin receptor and key post-receptor substrate proteins and balanced by the action of specific protein-tyrosine phosphatases (PTPases). PTPase activity, in turn, is highly regulated in vivo by oxidation/reduction reactions involving the cysteine thiol moiety required for catalysis. Here we show that insulin stimulation generates a burst of intracellular H(2)O(2) in insulin-sensitive hepatoma and adipose cells that is associated with reversible oxidative inhibition of up to 62% of overall cellular PTPase activity, as measured by a novel method using strictly anaerobic conditions. The specific activity of immunoprecipitated PTP1B, a PTPase homolog implicated in the regulation of insulin signaling, was also strongly inhibited by up to 88% following insulin stimulation. Catalase pretreatment abolished the insulin-stimulated production of H(2)O(2) as well as the inhibition of cellular PTPases, including PTP1B, and was associated with reduced insulin-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of its receptor and high M(r) insulin receptor substrate (IRS) proteins. These data provide compelling new evidence for a redox signal that enhances the early insulin-stimulated cascade of tyrosine phosphorylation by oxidative inactivation of PTP1B and possibly other tyrosine phosphatases.
95	NR	11278993	The receptor for the type 1 insulin-like growth factor (IGF-I) has been implicated in cellular transformation and the acquisition of an invasive/metastatic phenotype in various tumors. Following ligand binding, the IGF-I receptor is internalized, and the receptor.ligand complex dissociates as the ligand is degraded by endosomal proteinases. In the present study we show that the inhibition of endosomal IGF-I-degrading enzymes in human breast and murine lung carcinoma cells by the cysteine proteinase inhibitors, E-64 and CA074-methyl ester, profoundly altered receptor trafficking and signaling. In treated cells, intracellular ligand degradation was blocked, and although the receptor and two substrates, Shc and Insulin receptor substrate, were hyperphosphorylated on tyrosine, IGF-I-induced DNA synthesis, anchorage-independent growth, and matrix metalloproteinase synthesis were inhibited. The results suggest that ligand processing by endosomal proteinases is a key step in receptor signaling and function and a potential target for therapy.
95	NR	11278339	Incubation of rat hepatoma Fao cells with insulin leads to a transient rise in Tyr phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate (IRS) proteins. This is followed by elevation in their P-Ser/Thr content, and their dissociation from the insulin receptor (IR). Wortmannin, a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor, abolished the increase in the P-Ser/Thr content of IRS-1, its dissociation from the IR, and the decrease in its P-Tyr content following 60 min of insulin treatment, indicating that the Ser kinases that negatively regulate IRS-1 function are downstream effectors of PI3K. PKCzeta fulfills this criterion, being an insulin-activated downstream effector of PI3K. Overexpression of PKCzeta in Fao cells, by infection of the cells with adenovirus-based PKCzeta construct, had no effect on its own, but it accelerated the rate of insulin-stimulated dissociation of IR.IRS-1 complexes and the rate of Tyr dephosphorylation of IRS-1. The insulin-stimulated negative regulatory role of PKCzeta was specific and could not be mimic by infecting Fao cells with adenoviral constructs encoding for PKC alpha, delta, or eta. Because the reduction in P-Tyr content of IRS-1 was accompanied by a reduced association of IRS-1 with p85, the regulatory subunit of PI3K, it suggests that this negative regulatory process induced by PKCzeta, has a built-in attenuation signal. Hence, insulin triggers a sequential cascade in which PI3K-mediated activation of PKCzeta inhibits IRS-1 functions, reduces complex formation between IRS-1 and PI3K, and inhibits further activation of PKCzeta itself. These findings implicate PKCzeta as a key element in a multistep negative feedback control mechanism of IRS-1 functions.
95	NR	11262195	The insulin-like growth factor-II receptor (IGF-IIR) is frequently mutated or deleted in some malignant human tumors, suggesting that the IGF-IIR is a tumor suppressor. However, the exact mechanism by which IGF-IIR suppresses growth in tumors has not been definitively established. We demonstrate that IGF-IIR-deficient murine L cells (D9) have higher growth rates than IGF-IIR-positive L cells (Cc2) in response to IGF-II. IGF-II levels are higher in growth-conditioned medium from D9 versus Cc2 cells. Receptor neutralization studies and measurements of insulin receptor substrate 1 phosphorylation confirm that the enhanced growth of D9 cells is due to increased stimulation of the IGF-I and insulin receptors by IGF-II. In contrast, the levels of secreted latent and active transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) are similar for both D9 and Cc2 cells, indicating that the slower growth of Cc2 cells is not due to activation of latent TGF-beta by IGF-IIR and growth inhibition. The results directly demonstrate that down regulation of the IGF-IIR promotes the growth of transformed D9 cells by sustaining IGF-II, which binds to and activates IGF-IR and insulin receptor to increase intracellular growth signals.
95	NR	11237218	Over the past 20 years, it has been clearly documented that 1) polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) has major metabolic sequelae related to insulin resistance and 2) insulin resistance plays an important role in the pathogenesis of the reproductive abnormalities of the disorder. Women with PCOS are at significantly increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM). Studies in isolated adipocytes and in cultured skin fibroblasts from PCOS women have demonstrated intrinsic postbinding defects in insulin-mediated glucose metabolism. In fibroblasts, the mitogenic pathway of insulin action is intact, consistent with a selective defect in insulin signaling. While PCOS skeletal muscle is resistant to insulin in vivo, cultured muscle cells have normal insulin sensitivity, consistent with a major role of extrinsic factors in producing insulin resistance in this tissue. Excessive serine phosphorylation of the insulin receptor or downstream signaling proteins may be involved in the pathogenesis of insulin resistance in PCOS. The putative serine kinase is extrinsic to the insulin receptor but its identity is unknown. The explanations for tissue-specific and signaling pathway-specific differences in insulin action in PCOS are unknown but may involve differential roles of insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-1 and IRS-2 in insulin signal transduction.
95	NR	11230180	The tumour suppressor gene PTEN encodes a dual-specificity phosphatase that recognizes protein substrates and phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-triphosphate. PTEN seems to play multiple roles in tumour suppression and the blockade of phosphoinositide-3-kinase signalling is important for its growth suppressive effects, although precise mechanisms are not fully understood. In this study, we show that PTEN plays a unique role in the insulin-signalling pathway in a breast cancer model. Ectopic expression of wild-type PTEN in MCF-7 epithelial breast cancer cells resulted in universal inhibition of Akt phosphorylation in response to stimulation by diverse growth factors and selective inhibition of MEK/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) phosphorylation stimulated by insulin or insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1). The latter was accompanied by a decrease in the phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) and the association of IRS-1 with Grb2/Sos, without affecting the phosphorylation status of the insulin receptor and Shc, nor Shc/Grb2 complex formation. The MEK inhibitor, PD980059, but not the PI3K inhibitor, wortmannin, abolished the effect of PTEN on insulin-stimulated cell growth. Without addition of insulin, wortmannin reduced PTEN-mediated growth suppression, whereas PD980059 had little effect, suggesting that PTEN suppresses insulin-stimulated cell growth by blocking the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. Furthermore, PD980059 treatment led to the downregulation of cyclin D1 and the suppression of cell cycle progression. Our data suggest that PTEN blocks MAPK phosphorylation in response to insulin stimulation by inhibiting the phosphorylation of IRS-1 and IRS-1/Grb2/Sos complex formation, which leads to downregulation of cyclin D1, inhibition of cell cycle progression and suppression of cell growth.
95	NR	11211609	PS6K, a putative oncogene mapped to chromosome 17q23, encodes a serine/threonine kinase, which phosphorylates ribosomal subunit 6 and is part of the insulin receptor signal transduction pathway involved in the regulation of messenger RNA translation, protein synthesis, cell cycle progression, and cell size. Comparative genomic hybridization studies have detected 17q23 amplifications in a subset of meningiomas, particularly those with aggressive histologic features. PS6K amplifications have been reported in breast cancer, another hormonally driven neoplasm. We assessed PS6K dosage in 94 archival paraffin-embedded meningiomas using dual-color fluorescence in situ hybridization. We found high-level PS6K amplifications in 3 of 22 anaplastic grade III meningiomas. Amplification was confirmed by differential polymerase chain reaction in 1 of these cases. In contrast, no amplifications were identified in 37 benign (grade I) and 35 atypical (grade II) meningiomas. To our knowledge, this represents the first report of gene amplification in primary human meningiomas. Given its exclusive association with anaplastic meningiomas, PS6K amplification likely occurs during the malignant progression of a small subset of anaplastic tumors. Further studies are needed to map the 17q23 amplicon to determine whether additional genes in this region are amplified in high-grade meningiomas.
95	NR	11136729	Insulin signaling is regulated by tyrosine phosphorylation of the signaling molecules, such as the insulin receptor and insulin receptor substrates (IRSs). Therefore, the balance between protein-tyrosine kinases and protein-tyrosine phosphatase activities is thought to be important in the modulation of insulin signaling in insulin-resistant states. We thus employed the adenovirus-mediated gene transfer technique, and we analyzed the effect of overexpression of a wild-type protein-tyrosine phosphatase-1B (PTP1B) on insulin signaling in both L6 myocytes and Fao cells. In both cells, PTP1B overexpression blocked insulin-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of the insulin receptor and IRS-1 by more than 70% and resulted in a significant inhibition of the association between IRS-1 and the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and Akt phosphorylation as well as mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphorylation. Moreover, insulin-stimulated glycogen synthesis was also inhibited by PTP1B overexpression in both cells. These effects were specific for insulin signaling, because platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-stimulated PDGF receptor tyrosine phosphorylation and Akt phosphorylation were not inhibited by PTP1B overexpression. The present findings demonstrate that PTP1B negatively regulates insulin signaling in L6 and Fao cells, suggesting that PTP1B plays an important role in insulin resistance in muscle and liver.
95	NR	11149601	Mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase mediates cell proliferation, cell differentiation, and cell survival by regulating signaling pathways activated by receptor protein tyrosine kinases (RPTKs), including the insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-IR). We analyzed the upstream signaling components of the MAP kinase pathway, including RPTKs, in human breast cancer cell lines and found that some of those components were overexpressed. Importantly, signaling molecules such as IGF-IR, insulin receptor, and insulin receptor substrate 1, leading to the MAP kinase pathway, were found to be concomitantly overexpressed within certain tumor lines, i.e., MCF-7 and T-47D. When compared with the nonmalignant and other breast tumor lines examined, MCF-7 and T-47D cells displayed a more rapid, robust, and sustained MAP kinase activation in response to insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) stimulation. By contrast, IGF-I treatment led to a sustained down-regulation of MAP kinase in those lines overexpressing ErbB2-related RPTKs. Interestingly, blocking the MAP kinase pathway with PD098059 had the greatest antiproliferative effect on MCF-7 and T-47D among the normal and tumor lines tested. Furthermore, addition of an IGF-IR blocking antibody to growth medium attenuated the ability of PD098059 to suppress the growth of MCF-7 and T-47D cells. Thus, our study suggests that concomitant overexpression of multiple signaling components of the IGF-IR pathway leads to the amplification of IGF-I-mediated MAP kinase signaling and resultant sensitization to PD098059. The enhanced sensitivity to PD098059 implies an increased requirement for the MAP kinase pathway in those breast cancer cells, making this pathway a potential target in the treatment of selected breast malignancies.
95	NR	11145572	Insulin-like growth factor binding proteins (IGFBPs) regulate the cellular actions of the IGFs owing to their strong affinities, which are equal to or stronger than the affinity of the type 1 IGF receptor (IGF-IR), the mediator of IGF signal transduction. We recently found that IGFBP-3 modulates IGF-I binding to its receptor via a different mechanism possibly involving conformational alteration of the receptor. We have now investigated the effects of IGFBP-3 on the initial steps in the IGF signaling pathway. MCF-7 breast carcinoma cells were preincubated with increasing concentrations of IGFBP-3 and then stimulated with IGF-I, des(1-3)IGF-I, or [Q(3)A(4)Y(15)L(16)]-IGF-I, the latter two being IGF-I analogs with intact affinity for the type 1 IGF receptor, but weak or virtually no affinity for IGFBPs. Stimulation of autophosphorylation of the receptor and its tyrosine kinase activity was dose-dependently depressed. At 2.5 nM, IGFBP-3 provoked more than 50% inhibition of the stimulation induced by 3 nM des(1-3)IGF-1 and, at 10 nM, more than 80% inhibition. Similar results were obtained with [Q(3)A(4)Y(15)L(16)]-IGF-I. Cross-linking experiments using iodinated or unlabeled IGFBP-3 and anti-IGF-IR antibodies indicated that the inhibitory effects do not involve direct interaction between IGFBP-3 and IGF-IR. The inhibition appeared to be specific to IGFBP-3, because IGFBP-1 and IGFBP-5 at 10 nM had no significant effect. Also, inhibition was restricted to the IGF receptor, because IGFBP-3 failed to inhibit the tyrosine kinase activity of the insulin receptor stimulated by physiological concentrations of insulin. Our results provide the first demonstration that IGFBP-3 can specifically modulate the IGF-I signaling pathway independently of its IGF-I-binding ability. They also reveal a regulatory mechanism specific to the type 1 IGF receptor, with no effect on insulin receptor activation.
95	NR	11134557	DCA is hepatocarcinogenic in rodents. At carcinogenic doses, DCA causes a large accumulation of liver glycogen. Thus, we studied the effects of DCA treatment on insulin levels and expression of insulin-controlled signaling proteins in the liver. DCA treatment (0.2-2.0 g/l in drinking water for 2 weeks) reduced serum insulin levels. The decrease persisted for at least 8 weeks. In livers of mice treated with DCA for 2-, 10-, and 52-week periods, insulin receptor (IR) protein levels were significantly depressed. Additionally, protein kinase B (PKBalpha) expression decreased significantly with DCA treatment. In normal liver, glycogen levels were increased as early as at 1 week, and this effect preceded changes in insulin and IR and PKBalpha. In contrast to normal liver, IR protein was elevated in DCA-induced liver tumors relative to that in liver tissue of untreated animals and to an even greater extent when compared to adjacent normal liver in the treated animal. Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAP kinase) phosphorylation was also increased in tumor tissue relative to normal liver tissue and tissue from untreated controls. These data suggest that normal hepatocytes down-regulate insulin-signaling proteins in response to the accumulation of liver glycogen caused by DCA. Furthermore, these results suggest that the initiated cell population, which does not accumulate glycogen and is promoted by DCA treatment, responds differently from normal hepatocytes to the insulin-like effects of this chemical. The differential sensitivity of the 2 cell populations may contribute to the tumorigenic effects of DCA in the liver.
95	NR	11103940	There have been few studies on the specific signaling pathways involved in the transformation of epithelial cells by oncogenic protein tyrosine kinases. Here we investigate the requirement of MAP (MAPK) and phosphatidylinositol 3- (PI3K) kinases in the transformation of rat intestinal epithelial (RIE) cells by oncogenic forms of insulin receptor (gag-IR), insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (gag-IGFR), and v-Src. MAPK is not significantly activated in cells transformed by gag-IR and gag-IGFR but is activated in v-Src transformed cells. Treatment with PD98059, a MEK inhibitor, at concentrations where MAPK activity was reduced below the basal level showed that MAPK is partially required for the monolayer growth of parental and transformed RIE cells. However, MAPK is not essential for the focus forming ability of the three oncogene-transformed cells. It is also not necessary for the colony forming ability of gag-IR- and gag-IGFR-, but is partially required for v-Src-transformed cells. PI3K is significantly activated in all three oncogene transformed RIE cells. LY294002, a PI3K inhibitor, potently inhibited monolayer growth of all three oncogene-transformed cells. However, at concentrations of LY294002 where activated forms of Akt, a downstream component of the PI3K pathway, were undetectable, colony and focus forming abilities of the v-Src-RIE cells were only slightly affected whereas those of gag-IR/IGFR-RIE cells were greatly inhibited. These results were confirmed using a different pharmacological inhibitor, wortmannin, and a dominant negative form of PI3K, Ap85. Similarly, rapamycin, known to inhibit p70S6 kinase, a downstream component of the PI3K-Akt pathway, also inhibited gag-IR/IGFR-induced, but not v-Src-induced, focus and colony formation. We conclude that the MAPK and PI3K signaling pathways are differentially required for transformation of RIE cells by oncogenic IR and IGFR versus Src and the pattern of requirements is different from that of fibroblast transformation.
95	NR	11102895	The ligands, receptors and related signaling proteins of the insulin-like growth factor family are involved in the regulation of breast-cancer cell growth. We investigated the expression pattern of insulin-like growth factor-I receptor (IGF-IR), insulin receptor (IR) and insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1), a core downstream signaling protein, in 69 primary breast-cancer specimens of different grades and in 21 control tissues by immunohistochemistry. In addition, cell proliferation (percentage of Ki67(+) nuclei) and estrogen receptor (ER) expression were determined. IGF-IR, IRS-1 and IR were expressed mainly in epithelial cells. IRS-1 and IGF-IR were expressed at high levels in control tissues and in well and moderately differentiated carcinomas but at low levels in poorly differentiated breast cancers. IR expression did not show a significant correlation with the differentiation grade of the tissues investigated. Statistical analysis (ROC analysis for tumor grade) demonstrated that down-regulation of IGF-IR and IRS-1 correlated better with tumor progression than reduction of ER expression or increase in cell proliferation, IGF-IR showing the best correlation, followed by IRS-1 and, less significant, ER and Ki67. Our findings clearly show that progression of breast cancer is accompanied by a reduction of IGF-IR/IRS-1 expression and that IGF-IR/IRS-1 expression inversely correlates with high proliferation rate in dedifferentiated breast cancers. The strong correlation of IGF-IR and IRS-1 down-regulation with tumor progression suggests the use of IGF-IR and IRS-1 as a novel set of marker proteins for tumor grading.
95	NR	11094073	A recently reported new member of the Vav family proteins, Vav3 has been identified as a Ros receptor protein tyrosine kinase (RPTK) interacting protein by yeast two-hybrid screening. Northern analysis shows that Vav3 has a broad tissue expression profile that is distinct from those of Vav and Vav2. Two species of Vav3 transcripts, 3.4 and 5.4 kb, were detected with a differential expression pattern in various tissues. Transient expression of Vav in 293T and NIH 3T3 cells demonstrated that ligand stimulation of several RPTKs (epidermal growth factor receptor [EGFR], Ros, insulin receptor [IR], and insulin-like growth factor I receptor [IGFR]) led to tyrosine phosphorylation of Vav3 and its association with the receptors as well as their downstream signaling molecules, including Shc, Grb2, phospholipase C (PLC-gamma), and phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase. In vitro binding assays using glutathione S-transferase-fusion polypeptides containing the GTPase-binding domains of Rok-alpha, Pak, or Ack revealed that overexpression of Vav3 in NIH 3T3 cells resulted in the activation of Rac-1 and Cdc42 whereas a deletion mutant lacking the N-terminal calponin homology and acidic region domains activated RhoA and Rac-1 but lost the ability to activate Cdc42. Vav3 induced marked membrane ruffles and microspikes in NIH 3T3 cells, while the N-terminal truncation mutants of Vav3 significantly enhanced membrane ruffle formation but had a reduced ability to induce microspikes. Activation of IR further enhanced the ability of Vav3 to induce membrane ruffles, but IGFR activation specifically promoted Vav3-mediated microspike formation. N-terminal truncation of Vav3 activated its transforming potential, as measured by focus-formation assays. We conclude that Vav3 mediates RPTK signaling and regulates GTPase activity, its native and mutant forms are able to modulate cell morphology, and it has the potential to induce cell transformation.
95	NR	11078721	Biotin regulation of asialoglycoprotein receptor expression and insulin receptor activity has been established in two human hepatoblastoma cell lines, Hep G2 and HuH-7. Second messenger cGMP mimics the effect of biotin on asialoglycoprotein receptor expression at the translational level. Metabolic labeling and subsequent immunoprecipitation indicate that the loss of insulin receptor activity during biotin deprivation was due to suppression of receptor synthesis. Evidence for posttranscriptional regulation of insulin receptor synthesis was provided by rapid biotin induction of receptor synthesis without an increase in gene transcript number. Addition of a cGMP-dependent protein kinase (cGK) inhibitor prevented biotin induction of the insulin and asialoglycoprotein receptors, suggesting that protein phosphorylation propagates the cGMP signal transduction cascade. Coatomer protein COPI was recently identified as the trans-acting factor that regulates in vitro translation of the asialoglycoprotein receptor. Biotin repletion of the culture medium resulted in the hyperphosphorylation of alpha-COP, which was prevented by simultaneous addition of the cGK inhibitor. These findings suggest that the end point of this cGMP signal cascade is modulated by cGK and that a phosphorylation reaction governs the expression of both receptor proteins.
95	NR	11071852	SOCS proteins are a class of proteins that are negative regulators of cytokine receptor signaling via the Janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) pathway. In a yeast two-hybrid screen of a human fetal brain library, we have previously identified SOCS-2 as a binding partner of the activated IGF-I receptor (IGFIR). To test whether or not SOCS-3 also binds to the IGFIR, we cloned human SOCS-3 by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction from human skeletal muscle mRNA. SOCS-3 mRNA was expressed in many human fetal and adult tissues and in some human cancer cell lines (Hela, A549 pulmonary adenocarcinoma and G361 human melanoma). We found that human SOCS-3 protein interacts directly with the cytoplasmic domains of the activated IGFIR and the insulin receptor (IR) in the yeast two-hybrid assay. In GST-SOCS-3 pull-down experiments using IGFIR from mammalian cells and in immunoprecipitation experiments in which IGFIR and FLAG-SOCS-3 were transiently expressed in human embryonic kidney 293 cells, we found that SOCS-3 interacts constitutively with IGFIR in vitro and in intact cells. Unlike SOCS-2, hSOCS-3 was phosphorylated on tyrosines in response to IGF-I addition to 293 cells. We conclude that SOCS-3 binds to the IGFIR and may be a direct substrate for the receptor tyrosine kinase.
95	NR	11062161	Although exposure to asbestos fibers is associated with the development of lung cancer, the underlying mechanism(s) remains unclear. Using human papillomavirus-immortalized human bronchial epithelial (BEP2D) cells, we previously showed that UICC chrysotiles can malignantly transform these cells in a stepwise fashion before they become tumorigenic in nude mice. In the present study we used cDNA expression arrays to screen differentially expressed genes among the tumorigenic cells. A total of 15 genes were identified, 11 of which were further confirmed by northern blot. Expression levels of these genes were then determined among transformed BEP2D cells at different stages of the neoplastic process, including non-tumorigenic cells that were resistant to serum-induced terminal differentiation, early and late passage transformed BEP2D cells, five representative tumor cell lines and fused tumorigenic-control cell lines which were no longer tumorigenic. A consistent 2- to 3-fold down-regulation of the DCC (deleted in colon cancer), Ku70 and heat shock protein 27 genes were detected in all the independently generated tumor cell lines while expression levels in early transformants as well as in the fusion cell lines remained normal. In contrast, all the tumor cell lines examined demonstrated 2- to 4-fold overexpression of the insulin receptor and its signal transduction genes. Differential expression of these genes was completely restored in the fusion cell lines examined. No alteration in c-jun or EGF receptor expression was found in any of the cell lines. Our data suggest that activation of the insulin receptor pathway and inactivation of DCC and Ku70 may cooperate in malignant transformation of BEP2D cells induced by asbestos.
95	NR	11059749	Silibinin, a naturally occurring flavonoid antioxidant found in the milk thistle, has recently been shown to have potent antiproliferative effects against various malignant cell lines, but the underlying mechanism of action remains to be elucidated. We investigated the effect of silibinin on androgen-independent prostate cancer PC-3 cells. At pharmacologically achievable silibinin concentrations (0.02-20 microM), we observed increased insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 3 (IGFBP-3) accumulation in PC-3 cell conditioned medium and a dose-dependent increase of IGFBP-3 mRNA abundance with a 9-fold increase over baseline at 20 microM silibinin. An IGFBP-3 antisense oligodeoxynucleotide that attenuated silibinin-induced IGFBP-3 gene expression and protein accumulation reduced the antiproliferative action of silibinin. We also observed that silibinin reduced insulin receptor substrate 1 tyrosine phosphorylation, indicating an inhibitory effect on the insulin-like growth factor I receptor-mediated signaling pathway. These results suggest a novel mechanism by which silibinin acts as an antiproliferative agent and justify further work to investigate potential use of this compound or its derivatives in prostate cancer treatment and prevention.
95	NR	11043860	AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Patients treated with human immunodeficiency virus-1 protease inhibitors often develop impaired glucose tolerance or diabetes, most likely due to an induction of insulin resistance. We therefore investigated whether the protease inhibitor indinavir alters insulin signalling. METHODS: We incubated HepG2 cells for 48 h without or with indinavir (100 micromol/l). Subsequently 125I-insulin binding to the cells and the effects of insulin stimulation on insulin-receptor substrate-1-phosphorylation, association of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase with insulin-receptor substrate-1 and Akt-Thr308-phosphorylation were measured. RESULTS: In cells not exposed to indinavir, insulin (100 nmol/l) led to rapid increases of insulin-receptor substrate-1-phosphorylation, association of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase with insulin-receptor substrate-1 and Akt-phosphorylation during the first 75 s, followed by subsequent decreases. In indinavir-treated cells, these insulin-stimulated increases during the first 75 s were reduced by 30-60% and this was not associated with alterations in cell number or viability, insulin binding to the cells or cellular insulin-receptor substrate-1-content. CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Effects of indinavir on initial insulin signalling could cause, or contribute to, the metabolic effects of human immunodeficiency virus-1 protease inhibitors.
95	NR	11043572	Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha) has been implicated as a contributing mediator of insulin resistance observed in pathophysiological conditions such as obesity, cancer-induced cachexia, and bacterial infections. Previous studies have demonstrated that TNFalpha confers insulin resistance by promoting phosphorylation of serine residues on insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1), thereby diminishing subsequent insulin-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1. However, little is known about which signaling molecules are involved in this process in adipocytes and about the temporal sequence of events that ultimately leads to TNFalpha-stimulated IRS-1 serine phosphorylation. In this study, we demonstrate that specific inhibitors of the MAP kinase kinase (MEK)1/2-p42/44 mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway restore insulin signaling to normal levels despite the presence of TNFalpha. Additional experiments show that MEK1/2 activity is required for TNFalpha-induced IRS-1 serine phosphorylation, thereby suggesting a mechanism by which these inhibitors restore insulin signaling. We observe that TNFalpha requires 2.5-4 h to markedly reduce insulin-triggered tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1 in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Although TNFalpha activates p42/44 MAP kinase, maximal stimulation is observed within 10-30 min. To our surprise, p42/44 activity returns to basal levels well before IRS-1 serine phosphorylation and insulin resistance are observed. These activation kinetics suggest a mechanism of p42/44 action more complicated than a direct phosphorylation of IRS-1 triggered by the early spike of TNFalpha-induced p42/44 activity. Chronic TNFalpha treatment (>> 72 h) causes adipocyte dedifferentiation, as evidenced by the loss of triglycerides and down-regulation of adipocyte-specific markers. We observe that this longer term TNFalpha-mediated dedifferentiation effect utilizes alternative, p42/44 MAP kinase-independent intracellular pathways. This study suggests that TNFalpha-mediated insulin resistance, but not adipocyte dedifferentiation, is mediated by the MEK1/2-p42/44 MAP kinase pathway.
95	NR	11035789	The insulin-like growth factor (IGF) type 1 receptor is required for growth, transformation, and protection from apoptosis. IGFs can enhance cell migration, which is known to be influenced via regulation of the E-cadherin/beta-catenin complex. We sought to investigate whether IGF-1 modulated the interaction between E-cadherin and beta-catenin in human colorectal cancer cells. We used the C10 cell line, which we established and have previously shown to lack adenomatous polyposis coli, E-cadherin, or beta-catenin mutations. We found that IGF-1 stimulation enhanced tyrosine phosphorylation of two proteins, beta-catenin and insulin-receptor substrate 1, which formed a complex with E-cadherin. Tyrosine phosphorylation of beta-catenin was accompanied by rapid (<1 min) dissociation from E-cadherin at the plasma membrane, followed by relocation to the cellular cytoplasm. IGF-1 also enhanced the stability of beta-catenin protein. Despite this, we observed no enhancement of transcriptional activity in complex with T-cell factor 4 (Tcf-4) in human embryonic kidney 293 cells treated with IGF-1 or insulin alone. IGF-1 did, however, enhance transcriptional activity in combination with lithium chloride, an inhibitor of glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta, which also stabilizes beta-catenin. In conclusion, we have shown that IGF-1 causes tyrosine phosphorylation and stabilization of beta-catenin. These effects may contribute to transformation, cell migration, and a propensity for metastasis in vivo.
95	NR	11023522	Multiple myeloma (MM) is an invariably fatal disease that accounts for approximately 1% to 2% of all human cancers. Surprisingly little is known about the cellular pathways contributing to growth of these tumors. Although the cytokine interleukin-6 has been suggested to be the major stimulus for myeloma cell growth, the role of a second potential growth factor, insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I), has been less clearly defined. The IGF-I signaling cascade in 8 MM cell lines was examined. In 7 of these, the IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR) was expressed and autophosphorylated in response to ligand. Downstream of IGF-IR, insulin receptor substrate 1 was phosphorylated, leading to the activation of phosphatidylinositol-3'-kinase (PI-3K). PI-3K, in turn, regulated 2 distinct pathways. The first included Akt and Bad, leading to an inhibition of apoptosis; the second included the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), resulting in proliferation. Biologic relevance of this pathway was demonstrated because in vitro IGF-I induced both an antiapoptotic and a proliferative effect. Importantly, in vivo administration of IGF-I in SCID mice inoculated with the OPM-2 line led to approximately twice the growth rate of tumor cells as in controls. These results suggest that IGF-I activates at least 2 pathways effecting myeloma cell growth and contributes significantly to expansion of these cells in vivo. (Blood. 2000;96:2856-2861)
95	NR	10973656	OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the role of insulin-receptor substrate (IRS)-1 and -2 in ovary dysfunction in women with insulin resistance. DESIGN: Immunoblotting and immunohistochemical analyses of the localization and staining intensity of IRS-1 and IRS-2 in the ovaries of women with the polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and gestational diabetes mellitus. SETTING: Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Turku University Central Hospital. PATIENT(S): Sections of ovary were obtained at the time of cesarean section from five volunteers without medical complications and three patients with gestational diabetes mellitus. Paraffin-embedded ovary sections were selected from those on file from the department of pathology; four were from women with a histologic diagnosis of PCOS and seven were from women with endometriosis (controls). INTERVENTION(S): None. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Protein expression of IRS in human ovary samples. RESULT(S): Immunoblotting with specific monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies showed the presence of 165-kDa and 183-kDa proteins that corresponded to the size of IRS-1 and IRS-2, respectively, in normal pregnant ovaries and human cultured follicles. Immunohistochemical staining showed that positive IRS-2 expression in antral follicles was restricted to theca internal cells in ovulatory ovaries but was distributed widely in all compartments of follicles in different stages in polycystic ovaries. Compared with follicles at a similar stage of development in ovulatory ovaries, follicles in polycystic ovaries showed decreased staining for IRS-1 in granulosa cells but increased staining for IRS-2 in theca internal cells. These features of IRS-1 and -2 expression were also noted in preantral and atretic follicles from patients with gestational diabetes mellitus compared with those who had uncomplicated pregnancy. CONCLUSION(S): This study highlights a shift of the follicular insulin signal protein from IRS-1 to IRS-2 in insulin-resistant states and suggests an association between this change and ovarian abnormality in PCOS and gestational diabetes mellitus.
95	NR	11000521	Multiple endocrine neoplasia 2A (MEN 2A) is an inherited disease caused by mutations of the Ret proto-oncogene. Although many different Ret mutations have been described, little is known about the signaling pathways triggered by the Ret oncogene. In this study, we have determined the signaling properties of a Ret-9bp duplication encoding amino acids 634-636, which was recently identified in a patient with all clinical features of the MEN 2A syndrome. The Ret-9bp duplication leads to constitutive activation of the Ret tyrosine kinase. Furthermore, Ret-9bp increased mitogenic and transforming activity demonstrated by thymidine incorporation as well as colony formation in soft agar. Studying intracellular signaling pathways, which may be involved in malignant transformation of Ret-9bp expressing NIH3T3 cells, we could demonstrate Ret-9bp dependent phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate-2 (IRS-2) with consecutive activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase) and protein kinase B (PKB/AKT). Moreover, Ret-9bp induces phosphorylation of SHC resulting in growth factor receptor binding protein-2 (Grb-2) binding and activation of the mitogen activating protein (MAP) kinase pathway. In addition to these postreceptor cytoplasmic signaling events, we have studied nuclear signal by Ret-9bp and found activation of c-jun and jun-D, two members of the jun/AP-1 family of transcription factors. In summary, an oncogenic 9bp duplication of Ret causes Ret dimer formation and ligand independent activation of the tyrosine kinase. Besides the signaling steps leading to MAPK activation, we could demonstrate that Ret-9bp induced constitutive activation of a signaling pathway involving IRS-2, PI 3-kinase and PKB/AKT which could transduce the oncogenic Ret signal to increased gene transcription via activation of the jun/AP-1 transcription factor family.
95	NR	10987057	Insulin resistance is observed in several diseases such as non insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) or polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS). To understand genetic determinism of this abnormality we have developed a multidisciplinary approach including selection of phenotypes with insulin resistance confirmed in vivo by minimal model of Bergman and characterization of cellular defects in insulin action on circulating erythrocytes and monocytes. Exploration of variability in candidate genes by direct sequencing in some genetic syndromes of severe insulin resistance and acanthosis nigricans (mainly the Type A syndrome) revealed mutations of the insulin receptor gene associated with major defects in insulin binding or kinase activity. In other rare genetic syndromes or patients affected by NIDDM or PCOS defects appear to be located at post-receptor level, where IRS (insulin receptor substrate) genes are the most attractive candidates. Prevalence of some allelic variants suggested a potential role of IRS genes in insulin resistance, although their involvement in the pathogenesis of NIDDM remains controversial. Genotype-phenotype correlations in first degree relatives of an index case caring the Type A syndrome, suggested that association of allelic variants of IRS-1 and IRS-2 with insulin receptor mutations contribute, by synergistic effects, to phenotypic expression of defects in signal transduction. These mechanisms through genetic epistasis, involving several genes in insulin action, fit better with the polygenic nature of current forms of NIDDM and represent a good model in the study of pathogenesis of insulin resistance.
95	NR	10919668	Plasma cell neoplasia in humans generally occurs as multiple myeloma, an incurable form of cancer. Tumors with marked similarity can be induced in mice by a variety of agents, including chemicals, silicone, and oncogene-containing retroviruses, suggesting the use of murine tumors as an informative model to study plasma cell disease. Herein, we have focused on the role of insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGF-IR) signaling in the development of plasma cell disease. The insulin receptor substrate 2/phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase/p70S6K pathway was found to be either constitutively or IGF-I-dependently activated in all plasma cell tumors. Biological relevance was demonstrated in that plasma cell lines with up-regulated IGF-IR expression levels exhibited mitogenic responses to IGF-I. More importantly, expression of a dominant-negative mutant of IGF-IR in these lines strongly suppressed tumorigenesis in vivo. Taken together, these results demonstrate that up-regulation and activation of IGF-IR and the downstream signaling pathway involving insulin receptor substrate 2, phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase, and p70S6K may play an important role in the development of a broad spectrum of plasma cell tumors.
95	NR	10856136	In the past several years, extensive studies on the mechanisms underlying IL-4 and IL-13 signaling have enabled us to gain insight into how these cytokines regulate immune responses. Because both IL-4 and IL-13 use the IL-4Ralpha as a receptor component, these cytokines activate many common signaling pathways. Both of these cytokines use Janus kinases (JAKs) to initiate signaling and activate signal transducer and activator of transcription-6 (STAT6), which is a transcription factor required for many of their biologic functions. In addition to JAK/STAT, these cytokines also activate a variety of other signaling molecules that are important in regulating IL-4-induced proliferation and protection from apoptosis. Suppressor of cytokine signaling-1 (SOCS-1) is a molecule that can inhibit the activation of IL-4 signaling through the inhibition of JAKs. The Fes tyrosine kinase is activated by IL-4 and appears to be important in regulating IL-4-induced proliferation through the phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate (IRS) molecules. IRS molecules are essential for IL-4-induced proliferation through their ability to recruit phosphoinositol-3 kinase to the activated IL-4 receptor kinase. In addition, IL-4 can activate a number of phosphatases including SH2-containing inositol phosphatase (SHIP), SHP-1, and SHP-2. Finally, B-cell lymphoma gene-6 (BCL-6) appears to regulate a subset of IL-4-induced genes. Thus the biologic responses induced by IL-4/IL-13 require a complex interaction of signaling pathways and regulators.
95	NR	10844119	Pancreastatin, a chromogranin A-derived peptide widely distributed throughout the neuroendocrine system, has a general inhibitory effect on endocrine secretion and a counterregulatory effect on insulin action. We have recently described the cross-talk of pancreastatin with insulin signaling in rat hepatoma cells (HTC), where it inhibits insulin action and signaling through the serine phosphorylation of the insulin receptor, thereby impairing tyrosine kinase activity. Here, we have characterized pancreastatin receptors and signaling in HTC cells. The pancreastatin effector systems were studied by determining phospholipase C activity in HTC membranes and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) phosphorylation activity in HTC cells. Binding studies with radiolabeled pancreastatin showed a population of high affinity binding sites, with a B(max) of 8 fmol/mg protein and a K(d) of 0.6 nM. Moreover, we assessed the coupling of the receptor with a G protein system by inhibiting the binding with guanine nucleotide and by measuring the GTP binding to HTC membranes. We found that pancreastatin receptor was coupled with a G alpha(q/11) protein which activates phospholipase C-beta(1) and phospholipase C-beta(3), in addition to MAPK via both beta gamma and alpha(q/11).
95	NR	10846175	After an initial burst of cell proliferation, the type 1 insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF-IR) induces granulocytic differentiation of 32D IGF-IR cells, an interleukin-3-dependent murine hemopoietic cell line devoid of insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1). The combined expression of the IGF-IR and IRS-1 (32D IGF-IR/IRS-1 cells) inhibits IGF-I-mediated differentiation, and causes malignant transformation of 32D cells. Because of the role of IRS-1 in changing the fate of 32D IGF-IR cells from differentiation (and subsequent cell death) to malignant transformation, we have looked for differences in IGF-IR signaling between 32D IGF-IR and 32D IGF-IR/IRS-1 cells. In this report, we have focused on p70(S6K), which is activated by the IRS-1 pathway. We find that the ectopic expression of IRS-1 and the inhibition of differentiation correlated with a sustained activation of p70(S6K) and an increase in cell size. Phosphorylation in vivo of threonine 389 and, to a lesser extent, of threonine 421/serine 424 of p70(S6K) seemed to be a requirement for inhibition of differentiation. A role of IRS-1 and p70(S6K) in the alternative between transformation or differentiation of 32D IGF-IR cells was confirmed by findings that inhibition of p70(S6K) activation or IRS-1 signaling, by rapamycin or okadaic acid, induced differentiation of 32D IGF-IR/IRS-1 cells. We have also found that the expression of myeloperoxidase mRNA (a marker of differentiation, which sharply increases in 32D IGF-IR cells), does not increase in 32D IGF-IR/IRS-1 cells, suggesting that the expression of IRS-1 in 32D IGF-IR cells causes the extinction of the differentiation program initiated by the IGF-IR, while leaving intact its proliferation program.
95	NR	10830280	Stat proteins are SH2 domain-containing transcription factors that are activated by various cytokines and growth factors. In a previous work, we have identified Stat 5B as a substrate of the insulin receptor based on yeast two-hybrid and mammalian cell transfection studies. In the present study, we have approached the biological relevance of the interaction between the insulin receptor and the transcription factor Stat 5B. Firstly, we show that both insulin and insulin-like growth factor I lead to tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat 5B, and this promotes binding of the transcription factor to the beta-casein promoter containing a Stat 5 binding site. Further, we demonstrate that insulin stimulates the transcriptional activity of Stat 5B. Activation of Stat 5B by insulin appears to be Jak2-independent, whereas Jak2 is required for GH-induced Stat 5B activation. Hence the pathway by which Stat 5B is activated by insulin is different from that used by GH. In addition, by using Jak1- and Tyk2-deficient cells we exclude the involvement of both Jak1 and Tyk2 in Stat 5B activation by insulin. Taken together, our results strengthen the notion that insulin receptor can directly activate Stat 5B. More importantly, we have identified a Stat 5 binding site in the human hepatic glucokinase promoter, and we show that insulin leads to a Stat 5B-dependent increase in transcription of a reporter gene carrying this promoter. These observations favor the idea that Stat 5B plays a role in mediating the expression of the glucokinase gene induced by insulin. As a whole, our results provide evidence for the occurrence of a newly identified circuit in insulin signaling in which the cell surface receptor is directly linked to nuclear events through a transcription factor. Further, we have revealed an insulin target gene whose expression is, at least in part, dependent on Stat 5B activation and/or binding.
95	NR	10828835	Insulin-stimulated signaling pathways are activated upon interactions between the intracellular domains of the receptor and its downstream effectors. Insulin receptor substrate proteins (IRS-1, -2, -3 and -4) are the best-studied substrates for the insulin receptor kinase (IRK). We have previously shown that IRS-1 and IRS-2 interact with the juxtamembrane (JM) but not with the carboxyl-terminal (CT) region of the insulin receptor (IR) in vitro. However, the precise role of these IR regions in mediating insulin's bioeffects is still unresolved. In the present work we made use of vaccinia virus as a vector for quantitative expression of the JM and CT domains within the cytoplasm of physiologically insulin-responsive primary rat adipocytes and rat hepatoma Fao cells. We could demonstrate that overexpression of either the JM or the CT domains did not inhibit either insulin binding or insulin-stimulated receptor autophosphorylation. In contrast, metabolic effects such as insulin-induced glucose utilization in adipocytes, and insulin-induced amino acid utilization in Fao hepatoma cells were inhibited (70-80%) in cells overexpressing the JM but not the CT domains of IR. The inhibitory effects of the overexpressed JM domain were accompanied by inhibition of insulin-stimulated IRS-1 phosphorylation, decreased IRS-1-associated PI3K activity, and decreased phosphorylation of the downstream effectors of PI3K, PKB and p70 S6K. Insulin-stimulated thymidine incorporation in Fao cells was also inhibited (40%) upon overexpression of the JM but not the CT region of IR. Our findings suggest that interactions between the JM region of IR and its downstream effectors are obligatory for insulin-stimulated metabolic functions in physiologically relevant insulin responsive cells. They also rule out the possibility that interaction of proteins, including PI3K, with the CT domain can provide an alternative pathway.
95	NR	10811632	We have sought to determine whether insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) regulates the levels of insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) in prostate epithelial cells. Exposure of prostate epithelial cells to IGF-I in the absence of other growth factors leads to a reduction in IRS-1 levels. Ubiquitin content of IRS-1 is increased in the presence of IGF-I, and inhibitors of the proteasome prevented the reduction of IRS-1 levels seen following IGF-I exposure. These results imply that IRS-1 is targeted to the proteasome upon exposure to IGF-I. The addition of epidermal growth factor (EGF) maintained IRS-1 levels even in the presence of IGF-I and inhibits IGF-I-dependent ubiquitination of IRS-1. Thus, these two growth factors, IGF-I and EGF, had antagonistic effects on IRS-1 protein levels in prostate epithelial cells. This regulation of IRS-1 reveals a novel level of cross-talk between the IGF-I and EGF signal pathways, which may have implications in tumors that harbor activating mutations in the EGF receptor.
95	NR	10804539	Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is the most common endocrine disorder in women of reproductive age. It has become increasingly evident that insulin resistance plays a significant role both as a cause and result of the syndrome. The purpose of this review is to summarize the possible mechanisms leading to insulin resistance and resultant hyperinsulinism (HI) and their interaction with hyperandrogenism (HA) in PCOS. We conducted a computerized search of MEDLINE for relevant studies in the English literature published between January 1966 and January 2000. We reviewed all studies that investigated the roles of insulin, insulin receptor, and insulin gene in insulin resistance and its interaction with hyperandrogenism in PCOS. Insulin resistance in PCOS seems to involve a postbinding defect in the insulin receptor and/or in the receptor signal transduction. Current research has focused on identifying a genetic predisposition for insulin resistance in this syndrome. The answer to the question whether HI or HA is the initiating event is still unclear inasmuch as there are clinical and molecular evidences to support both of these approaches. Our view is that whichever is the triggering insult, a vicious cycle is established where HI acts to aggravate HA and vice versa. In this model, obesity and genetic predisposition seem to be the independent factors that can give rise or contribute to HI, HA, or both simultaneously. It seems that "hyperinsulinemic hyperandrogenism" represents a significant subgroup of PCOS, which probably needs to be renamed and reclassified in the light of this new approach.
95	NR	10803466	The molecular adapter Grb7 is likely to be implicated in the development of certain cancer types. In this study we show that Grb7 binds the insulin receptors, when they are activated and tyrosine phosphorylated. This interaction is documented by two-hybrid experiments, GST pull-down assays and in vivo coimmunoprecipitations. In addition, our results argue in favor of a preferential association between Grb7 and the insulin receptors when compared to other tyrosine kinase receptors like the EGF receptor, the FGF receptor and Ret. Interestingly, Grb7 is not a substrate of the insulin receptor tyrosine kinase activity. Grb7 binds the activated tyrosine kinase loop of the insulin receptors. Two domains of Grb7 are implicated in the insulin receptor binding: the SH2 domain and the PIR (phosphotyrosine interacting region). The role of these two domains in the interaction with the insulin receptor was already reported for Grb10 and Grb14, the other members of the Grb7 family of proteins. However, the relative importance of these domains varies, considering the receptor and the Grb protein. These differences should be a determinant of the specificity of the receptor tyrosine kinase-Grbs binding, and thus of the implication of Grb7/10/14 in signal transduction.
95	NR	10798222	Recent studies have shown that high insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) blood level is a risk factor in breast and prostate cancer. The aim of this study was to determine whether the mitogenic activity of IGF-I in mammary cancer cells can be reduced by the dietary carotenoid lycopene. The anticancer activity of lycopene, the major tomato carotenoid, has been suggested by in vitro, in vivo, and epidemiological studies. Growth stimulation of MCF7 mammary cancer cells by IGF-I was markedly reduced by physiological concentrations of lycopene. The inhibitory effects of lycopene on MCF7 cell growth were not accompanied by apoptotic or necrotic cell death, as determined by annexin V binding to plasma membrane and propidium iodide staining of nuclei in unfixed cells. Lycopene treatment markedly reduced the IGF-I stimulation of tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate 1 and binding capacity of the AP-1 transcription complex. These effects were not associated with changes in the number or affinity of IGF-I receptors, but with an increase in membrane-associated IGF-binding proteins, which were previously shown in different cancer cells to negatively regulate IGF-I receptor activation. The inhibitory effect of lycopene on IGF signaling was associated with suppression of IGF-stimulated cell cycle progression of serum-starved, synchronized cells. Moreover, in cells synchronized by mimosine treatment, lycopene delayed cell cycle progression after release from the mimosine block. Collectively, the above data suggest that the inhibitory effects of lycopene on MCF7 cell growth are not due to the toxicity of the carotenoid but, rather, to interference in IGF-I receptor signaling and cell cycle progression.
95	NR	10777546	Estrogens can stimulate the proliferation of estrogen-responsive breast cancer cells by increasing their proliferative response to insulin-like growth factors. The mechanism underlying the increased proliferation could involve the induction of components of the insulin-like growth factor signal transduction pathway by estrogen. In this study we have examined the regulation of the expression of insulin receptor substrate-1, a major intracellular substrate of the type I insulin-like growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase. Estradiol increased insulin receptor substrate-1 mRNA and protein levels at concentrations consistent with a mechanism involving the estrogen receptor. Insulin receptor substrate-1 was not induced significantly by the antiestrogens tamoxifen and ICI 182,780, but they inhibited the induction of insulin receptor substrate-1 by estradiol. Analysis of tyrosine-phosphorylated insulin receptor substrate-1 showed that the highest levels were found in cells stimulated by estradiol and insulin-like growth factor-I, whereas low levels were found in the absence of estradiol irrespective of whether type I insulin-like growth factor ligands were present. Insulin receptor substrate-2, -3, and -4 were not induced by estradiol. These results suggest that estrogens and antiestrogens may regulate cell proliferation by controlling insulin receptor substrate-1 expression, thereby amplifying or attenuating signaling through the insulin-like growth factor signal transduction pathway.
95	NR	10764799	The effects of a high concentration of glucose on the insulin receptor-down signaling were investigated in human hepatoma (HepG2) cells in vitro to delineate the molecular mechanism of insulin resistance under glucose toxicity. Treatment of the cells with high concentrations of glucose (15-33 mm) caused phosphorylation of serine residues of the insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1), leading to reduced electrophoretic mobility of it. The phosphorylation of IRS-1 with high glucose treatment was blocked only by protein kinase C (PKC) inhibitors. The high glucose treatment attenuated insulin-induced association of IRS-1 and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of Akt. A metabolic effect of insulin, stimulation of glycogen synthesis, was also inhibited by the treatment. In contrast, insulin-induced association of Shc and Grb2 was not inhibited. Treatment of the cells with high glucose promoted the translocation of PKCepsilon and PKCdelta from the cytosol to the plasma membrane but not that of other PKC isoforms. Finally, PKCepsilon and PKCdelta directly phosphorylated IRS-1 under cell-free conditions. We conclude that a high concentration of glucose causes phosphorylation of IRS-1, leading to selective attenuation of metabolic signaling of insulin. PKCepsilon and PKCdelta are involved in the down-regulation of insulin signaling, and they may lie in a pathway regulating the phosphorylation of IRS-1.
95	NR	10744706	Interleukin-4 (IL-4) activates Stat6 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 6) and plays multiple roles in regulation of the immune system. IL-4 also triggers phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate (IRS), leading to stimulation of cell growth. Moreover, IL-4 inhibits proliferation of a variety of cells, but the molecular mechanism of its growth inhibitory effect is not understood. In this study, we demonstrated that IL-4 inhibited cell growth of colon carcinoma cell lines (HT29 and WiDr) but promoted cell growth of Burkitt's lymphoma cell lines (BL30 and BL41) in a dose-dependent manner. The growth inhibition was not dependent on Stat6 activation, because Stat6 was activated at similar levels in all cell lines in response to IL-4. Strikingly, IL-4 activated Stat1 in colon carcinoma cell lines but not in Burkitt's lymphoma cell lines. Therefore, these results suggest that IL-4 induced Stat1 activation, resulting in growth inhibition of colon carcinoma cell lines. Importantly, we present evidence that Stat1 is necessary for IL-4-mediated growth inhibition using Stat1-deficient and Stat1-reconstituted cells. The growth inhibitory effect of IL-4 was diminished in Stat1-deficient cells, whereas it was restored in Stat1-reconstituted cells. In addition, the expression of dominant-negative Stat1 in HT29 cells led to the loss of growth inhibition in response to IL-4. Taken together, our data suggest that IL-4 activates Stat1, leading to cell growth inhibition in colon cancer cells. Thus, this study demonstrates, for the first time, a molecular mechanism by which IL-4 inhibits cell growth.
95	NR	10674396	The 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/delta5-delta4 isomerase (3beta-HSD) isoenzymes catalyze an essential step in the formation of all classes of active steroid hormones. We have recently shown that 3beta-HSD type 1 gene expression is specifically induced by interleukin (IL)-4 and IL-13 in breast human cancer cell lines and in normal human mammary epithelial cells in primary culture. There is evidence that IL-4 stimulates bifurcating signaling pathways in which the signal transducer and activator of transcription-6 (Stat6)-signal pathway is involved in differentiation and gene regulation, whereas insulin receptor substrate (IRS) proteins mediate the mitogenic action of IL-4. In fact, we have shown that Stat6 was activated by IL-4 in all cell lines studied where IL-4 induced 3beta-HSD expression, but not in those that failed to respond to IL-4. The present study was designed to investigate the potential contribution of IRS proteins and their downstream targets to IL-4-induced 3beta-HSD type 1 gene expression. IL-4 rapidly induced IRS-1 and IRS-2 phosphorylation in ZR-75-1 human breast cancer cell lines. Moreover, insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I and insulin, which are well known to cause IRS-1 and IRS-2 phosphorylation, increased the stimulatory effect of IL-4 on 3beta-HSD activity. IRS-1 and IRS-2 are adapter molecules that provide docking sites for different SH2-domain-containing proteins such as the phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3-kinase. In this light, the inhibition of IL-4-induced 3beta-HSD expression by wortmannin and LY294002, two potent PI 3-kinase inhibitors, indicates the probable involvement of the PI 3-kinase signaling molecules in this response to IL-4. Furthermore, it has been suggested that the IRS proteins are part of the signaling complexes that lead to activation of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase by insulin; thus we investigated the potential role of the MAP kinase (MAPK) cascade in the IL-4 action. In ZR-75-1 cells, both the activation of MAPK by IL-4 and the IL-4-induced 3beta-HSD activity were completely blocked by PD98059, an inhibitor of MAPK activation. Wortmannin also blocked MAPK activation by IL-4, IGF-I, and insulin, suggesting that the MAPK cascade acts as a downstream effector of PI 3-kinases. To further understand the cross-talk between signaling pathways involved in IL-4 action, we investigated the possible involvement of protein kinase C (PKC). The potential role of PKC was suggested by the observation that the well known PKC activator phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA) potentiated the IL-4-induced 3beta-HSD activity. Taken together, these findings suggest the existence of a novel mechanism of gene regulation by IL-4. This mechanism would involved the phosphorylation of IRS-1 and IRS-2, which transduce the IL-4 signal through a PI 3-kinase- and MAPK-dependent signaling pathway. The inability of IGF-I, insulin, and PMA to stimulate 3beta-HSD expression by themselves in the absence of IL-4 makes obvious the absolute requirement of an IL-4-specific signaling molecule. Our findings thus suggest that the multiple pathways downstream of IRS-1 and IRS-2 must act in cooperation with the IL-4-specific transcription factor Stat6 to mediate the induction of 31beta-HSD type 1 gene expression in ZR-75-1 human breast cancer cells.
95	NR	10669726	Insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) is a critical adapter protein involved in both insulin and insulin-like growth factor (IGF) signaling. Due to the fact that alteration of IRS-1 levels can affect the sensitivity and response to both insulin and IGF-I, we examined the ability of each of these ligands to affect IRS-1 expression. IGF-I (10 nM) stimulation of MCF-7 breast cancer cells caused a transient tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1 that was maximal at 15 min and decreased thereafter. The decrease in tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1 was paralleled by an apparent decrease in IRS-1 levels. The IGF-mediated decrease in IRS-1 expression was posttranscriptional and due to a decrease in the half-life of the IRS-1 protein. Insulin (10 nM) caused tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1 but not degradation, whereas high concentrations of insulin (10 microM) resulted in degradation of IRS-1. IGF-I (10 nM) stimulation resulted in transient IRS-1 phosphorylation and extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK) activation. In contrast, insulin (10 nM) caused sustained IRS-1 phosphorylation and ERK activation. Inhibition of 26S proteasome activity by the use of lactacystin or MG132 completely blocked IGF-mediated degradation of IRS-1. Furthermore, coimmunoprecipitation experiments showed an association between ubiquitin and IRS-1 that was increased by treatment of cells with IGF-I. Finally, IGF-mediated degradation of IRS-1 was blocked by inhibition of phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase activity but was not affected by inhibition of ERK, suggesting that this may represent a direct negative-feedback mechanism resulting from downstream IRS-1 signaling. We conclude that IGF-I can cause ligand-mediated degradation of IRS-1 via the ubiquitin-mediated 26S proteasome and a phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase-dependent mechanism and that control of degradation may have profound effects on downstream activation of signaling pathways.
95	NR	10629105	Growth factors and their receptors are known to send at times contradictory signals, such as proliferation or differentiation. Recent developments in our knowledge of growth factor receptors and their signaling pathways have clarified the basis for this puzzling behavior. Separate domains of a receptor and/or the availability of specific substrates determine the fate of a cell stimulated by the same growth factor. In some models, the difference between malignant transformation and differentiation (leading to cell death) may depend on the presence or absence of a single agonist or antagonist molecule. The type 1 insulin-like growth factor receptor will serve as the paradigm for this review. J. Cell. Biochem. Suppls. 32/33:68-75, 1999.
95	NR	10620325	We evaluated the expression of glucose transporter (glut) isoforms and its function in RD cells, human rhabdomyosarcoma, which retain the potential to differentiate into muscle. Gluts 1, 3, and 4 were expressed in RD cells, as detected by reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction and immunocytochemistry. Supraphysiological concentration (1 microM) of insulin treatment increased 2-deoxy glucose transport by up to 1.68-fold together with concomitant tyrosine phosphorylation of the insulin receptor beta subunit and of insulin receptor substrate 1. Suppression of glut 1 mRNA by 38% by antisense oligonucleotide transfection led to a reduction of basal and insulin-stimulated 2-deoxy glucose transport by 38 and 55%, respectively. Suppression of gluts 3 and 4 by antisense oligonucleotide transfection did not affect both basal and insulin-stimulated 2-deoxy glucose transport. Thus, glut 1 accounts for the major part of basal and insulin-stimulated glucose transport in RD cells. Next, we transfected expression vectors carrying human gluts 1 and 4 cDNAs into RD cells to add further support for the role of glut 1 in glucose transport. Overexpression of glut 1 stimulated basal and insulin-stimulated 2-deoxy glucose transport by 1.66- and 1.43-fold, respectively. Glut 4 overexpression did not affect basal and insulin-stimulated 2-deoxy glucose transport. Western blot analysis using glut 1 antibody showed that glut 1 was redistributed from intracellular membrane to plasma membrane. These observations support the notion that RD cells, with the potential to differentiate into muscle, retain insulin responsiveness. As human muscle cell lines are not available at this point, RD cells can serve as a useful alternative to human muscle for studies related to insulin signal transduction and glucose transport.
95	NR	10618497	The STAT multigene family of transcriptional regulators conveys signals from several cytokines and growth factors upon phosphorylation by janus kinases (JAK). Activation of STAT5 is typically mediated by JAK2, but more recent data indicate a direct activation by the insulin receptor kinase. STAT5 exists in two closely homologous isoforms, STAT5a and b. We here describe the selective tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5b in Kym-1 cells in response to insulin. Blocking insulin signalling by HNMPA-(AM)(3), an insulin receptor kinase inhibitor, resulted in the loss of insulin-induced STAT5b tyrosine phosphorylation, whereas the inhibition of JAK2 by the JAK selective inhibitor tyrphostin AG490 had no effect. By contrast, in the same cells, IFNgamma-induced STAT5b activation was JAK2-dependent, indicating that this signal pathway is functional in Kym-1 cells. We conclude from this rhabdomyosarcoma model that STAT5b, but not STAT5a is a direct target of the insulin receptor kinase.
95	NR	10583412	The proliferation and metabolism of H4IIE hepatoma cells is apparently mediated through the insulin receptor. These cells, however, also have high-affinity binding sites for insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I). Addition of insulin to H4IIE cells increased RNA synthesis, DNA synthesis and cell number. IGF-I, on the other hand, was ineffective at concentrations equivalent to the lowest effective insulin dose, although stimulation was observed with concentrations 100-fold higher. Similar results were obtained when glucose uptake was measured. Western blot analysis demonstrated that tyrosine phosphorylation patterns produced by insulin and IGF-I differed. In particular, phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) was evident after treatment with insulin, but not after treatment with IGF-I. Correspondingly, insulin, but not IGF-I, stimulated receptor tyrosine kinase activity. In contrast with these results, both insulin and IGF-I induced mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase phosphorylation and activity at a concentration of 10 nM. The correlation between insulin-dependent and IGF-I-dependent MAP kinase activation was confirmed by Western blot analysis of phosphorylated MAP kinase kinase (MEK). These results suggest that phosphorylation of IRS-1 is essential for both cell proliferation and glucose metabolism, but is uncoupled from the MAP kinase cascade. Furthermore, stimulation of MEK and MAP kinase is independent of receptor tyrosine kinase activity.
95	NR	10551398	BACKGROUND/AIMS: The ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade plays an important role not only in the mitogenic signal transduction pathway but also in the development of cancer, and it is believed to be one of the important regulators in normal hepatocytes and hepatocellular carcinoma. The aim of this study was to determine the role of insulin receptor substrate-1 and the MAPK cascade in rats with hepatocellular carcinoma induced by 3'-methyl-4-dimethylamino-azobenzene (3'-MeDAB). METHODS: Liver cancer was induced in rats by feeding 3'-MeDAB, and the changes in expression of IRS-1 and MAPK were analyzed in tumorous, non-tumorous and control liver. RESULTS: Expression of insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) showed a 1.4-fold increase at protein level in the tumors (p<0.01), but the tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1 did not differ between the tumor and control liver. Expression of MAPK and its activity were elevated 4.5-7.5-fold (p<0.01) and 4.6-fold (p<0.01) in the tumor compared with control liver. In non-tumorous lesions from rats fed with 3'-MeDAB, expression of MAPK, but not IRS-1, increased significantly (p<0.01). Between tumorous and adjacent non-tumorous lesions, there was a significant difference in MAPK expression (p<0.05) and activities (p<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: The increased expression of MAPK may play an important role in the progression or initiation of HCC in this rat model.
95	NR	10543935	IGF-responsive breast cancer cells activate insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-1 after IGF-I treatment. To determine if IRS-1 expression was sufficient to enable IGF-responsiveness, two IGF-I unresponsive breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-435A and MDA-MB-468) were transfected with IRS-1. While IGF-I caused tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1 in both transfected cell lines, increased MAP kinase activity was not seen. IGF-I treatment of 435A IRS-1 transfected cells resulted in minimal increased PI3 kinase activity associated with IRS-1, while IRS-2/PI3 kinase was greatly reduced. In MDA-MB-468 IRS-1 transfected cells, IGF-I caused increased IRS-1 associated PI3 kinase activity compared to parental cells, but at levels far below those observed in IGF-responsive MCF-7 cells. The transfected cells were also not responsive to IGF-I in monolayer growth. Thus, IRS-1 expression and activation alone are insufficient to mediate a proliferative response to IGF-I in breast cancer cells, and it is likely that maximal activation of downstream signaling pathways must also occur.
95	NR	10487672	Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is characterized by hyperandrogenemia that is amplified by insulin in the presence of resistance to insulin's action to stimulate glucose uptake in muscle and fat. To explore the mechanisms for this paradox, we examined the metabolic and mitogenic actions of insulin and insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) in cultured skin fibroblasts from PCOS (n = 16) and control (n = 11) women. There were no significant decreases in the number or affinity of insulin- or IGF-I-binding sites in PCOS compared to control fibroblasts. Basal rates were similar, but there were significant decreases in insulin-stimulated (control, 51.8 +/- 7.0; PCOS, 29.5 +/- 2.9 nmol/10(6) cells x 2 h at 1,000,000 pmol/L; P < 0.005) and IGF-I-stimulated (control, 48.9 +/- 6.7; PCOS, 33.0 +/- 3.2 PCOS nmol/10(6) cells x 2 h at 100,000 pmol/L IGF-I; P < 0.05) glucose incorporation into glycogen in PCOS fibroblasts, a metabolic action of insulin. Stimulation of thymidine incorporation, a mitogenic action of insulin, was similar in PCOS and control fibroblasts in response to both insulin and IGF-I. There were also no significant differences in insulin- or IGF-I-stimulated insulin receptor substrate-1-associated phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase activity in PCOS compared to control fibroblast cells. We conclude that 1) there is a selective defect in insulin action in PCOS fibroblasts that affects metabolic, but not mitogenic, signaling pathways; 2) there is a similar defect in IGF-I action, suggesting that insulin and IGF-I stimulate glycogen synthesis by the same postreceptor pathways; and 3) insulin receptor substrate-1-associated phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase activation by insulin and IGF-I is similar to the control value, suggesting that the metabolic signaling defect is in another pathway or downstream of this signaling step in PCOS fibroblasts.
95	NR	10459021	Insulin-like growth factor (IGF) II is overexpressed in many human cancers and is reactivated by, and crucial for viral oncogene (SV40 T antigen, [TAg])-induced tumorigenesis in several tumor models. Using a double transgenic murine hepatic tumor model, we demonstrate that tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1 (TIMP-1) blocks liver hyperplasia during tumor development, despite TAg-mediated reactivation of IGF-II. Because the activity of IGFs is controlled by IGF-binding proteins (IGFBPs), we investigated whether TIMP-1 overexpression altered the IGFBP status in the transgenic liver. Ligand blotting showed that IGFBP-3 protein levels were increased in TIMP-1-overexpressing double transgenic littermates, whereas IGFBP-3 mRNA levels were not different, suggesting that TIMP-1 affects IGFBP-3 at a posttranscriptional level. IGFBP-3 proteolysis assays demonstrated that IGFBP-3 degradation was lower in TIMP-1-overexpressing livers, and zymography showed that matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) were present in the liver homogenates and were capable of degrading IGFBP-3. As a consequence of reduced IGFBP-3 proteolysis and elevated IGFBP-3 protein levels, dissociable IGF-II levels were significantly lower in TIMP-1-overexpressing animals. This decrease in bioavailable IGF-II ultimately resulted in diminished IGF-I receptor signaling in vivo as evidenced by diminished receptor kinase activity and decreased tyrosine phosphorylation of the IGF-I receptor downstream effectors, insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1), extracellular signal regulatory kinase (Erk)-1, and Erk-2. Together, these results provide evidence that TIMP-1 inhibits liver hyperplasia, an early event in TAg-mediated tumorigenesis, by reducing the activity of the tumor-inducing mitogen, IGF-II. These data implicate the control of MMP-mediated degradation of IGFBPs as a novel therapy for controlling IGF bioavailability in cancer.
95	NR	10438568	The type 1 insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF-IR) plays an important role in malignant transformation and in apoptosis. Its role in human cancer has now been firmly established. IGF-IR signaling occurs only when the receptor is activated by its ligands, which induce autophosphorylation of the receptor at several tyrosine residues. Although the IGF-IR (phosphorylated or not) can be detected in human cancers with conventional antibodies, it would be desirable to obtain antibodies that can detect the IGF-IR only when activated by its ligands. We describe and characterize in this paper such an antibody and show that it can be used in sections of human cancers to detect an autophosphorylated IGF-IR. This antibody will be useful in detecting autocrine or paracrine influences on normal and tumor cells and could eventually be also useful in diagnostic and prognostic studies of human primary and metastatic cancer.
95	NR	10430617	Recent studies have identified several polymorphisms in the human insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) gene. The most prevalent IRS-1 variant, a Gly-->Arg change at the codon 972, has been reported to be increased in prevalence among patients with type 2 diabetes. Carriers of the Arg(972) substitution are characterized by lower fasting insulin and C-peptide levels compared with non-carriers, suggesting that the Arg(972) IRS-1 variant may contribute to impairment of insulin secretion. In this study, we stably overexpressed both wild-type IRS-1 (RIN-WT) and Arg(972) IRS-1 variant (RIN-Arg(972)) in RIN beta cells to investigate directly whether the polymorphism in codon 972 of IRS-1 impairs insulin secretion. The Arg(972) IRS-1 variant did not affect expression or function of endogenous IRS-2. RIN-WT showed a marked increase in both glucose- and insulin-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1 compared with control RIN cells. The Arg(972) IRS-1 variant did not alter the extent of either glucose- or insulin-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of recombinant IRS-1. However, RIN-Arg(972) showed a significant decrease in binding of the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI 3-kinase) with IRS-1, compared with RIN-WT. Compared with control RIN cells, insulin content was reduced to the same extent in RIN-WT or RIN-Arg(972) at both the protein and mRNA levels. Both glucose- and sulfonylurea-induced insulin secretion was increased in RIN-WT compared with control RIN cells. By contrast, RIN cells expressing Arg(972) IRS-1 exhibited a marked decrease in both glucose- and sulfonylurea-stimulated insulin secretion compared with RIN-WT. These data suggest that the insulin signaling pathway involving the IRS-1/PI 3-kinase may play an important role in the insulin secretory process in pancreatic beta cells. More importantly, the results suggest that the common Arg(972) IRS-1 polymorphism may impair glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, thus contributing to the relative insulin deficiency observed in carriers of this variant.
95	NR	10430101	The insulin receptor (IR) form hybrids with the closely related insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) receptor (IGF-I-R). Because most human breast carcinomas overexpress both the IR and the IGF-I-R, we evaluated whether the insulin/IGF-I hybrid receptor (Hybrid-R) is also overexpressed in these tumors and what role it plays in breast cancer biology. Using specific ELISAs and Western blots, we measured Hybrid-R content and function in 8 human cultured breast cancer cell lines and 39 human breast cancer specimens. Hybrid-R content and function were also compared to the content and function of the IR and the IGF-I-R. Hybrid-R content exceeded the IGF-I-R content in >75% of breast cancer specimens and was directly related to the molar ratio of both the IR and IGF-I-R content, suggesting that Hybrid-R formation occurred by random assembly of IR and IGF-I-R half-receptors. Hybrid-Rs became tyrosine autophosphorylated when breast cancer cells were exposed to IGF-I but not when they were exposed to insulin. In cells with an elevated Hybrid-R content, Hybrid-R autophosphorylation in response to IGF-I exceeded IGF-I-R autophosphorylation, suggesting that most of the IGF-I effect occurred via the Hybrid-R. Furthermore, Hybrid-Rs mediated growth in response to IGF-I, as indicated by experiments with blocking antibodies to the IGF-I-R. These data indicated therefore that: (a) Hybrid-Rs are present and play a major role in mediating the IGF-I signal in breast cancer; (b) their expression is directly related to IR overexpression; and (c) potential therapies designed to block IGF-I actions in breast cancer must take into account the role of these Hybrid-Rs.
95	NR	10401676	The insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) plays an important role in determining the biological behavior of a variety of malignancies. We measured IGF-I, its receptor and related receptors in thyroid cancer. IGF-I was present both in normal thyroid tissue and in thyroid cancer tissue and it was produced by stromal cells but not by thyrocytes. Values were significantly higher in malignant than in normal tissue. IGF-I receptors (IGF-I-Rs) and the homologous insulin receptors (IRs) were found overexpressed in both thyroid cancer cell lines (n = 4) and specimens (n = 17) as compared to normal values. In addition, high levels of hybrid IGF-I/insulin receptors (IR/IGF-I-Rs) were present in both thyroid cancer specimens and cell lines. IR/IGF-I-R hybrids were the most represented type of receptor in 14/17 specimens and exceeded the IGF-I-R content in all cases. Hybrid content correlated with the IR and IGF-I-R content, suggesting that in thyroid tissue hybrid formation occurs by random assembly of IR and IGF-I-R half receptors. Hybrid receptor autophosphorylation was stimulated by IGF-I with high affinity. In cells with a high IR/IGF-I-Rs content, blocking antibodies specific to these receptors substantially inhibited IGF-I induced cell growth. These data indicate that the IGF-I system is overactivated in thyroid cancer and that IR/IGF-I-R hybrid receptors play an important role in IGF-I mitogenic signaling in these tumors.
95	NR	10395191	Insulin resistance, a smaller than expected response to a given dose of insulin, is associated with many common diseases including, ageing, polycystic ovarian disease, syndrome X, cancer, infections, trauma and, most significantly, obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus. The biochemical basis of insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes has been the subject of many studies. Earlier studies have indicated that quantitative regulation of the insulin sensitive glucose transporters (Glut-4) and insulin receptors themselves may contribute to this disorder, however, these two factors are probably inadequate to explain the extent of insulin resistance. This point also became apparent by the development of only mild hyperinsulinaemia in mice with a targeted mutation in the Glut-4 gene. Studies on postreceptor defects in type 2 diabetes has recently focused on the intrinsic catalytic activity of the insulin receptor and downstream signalling events. A reduction in tyrosine phosphorylation of both the insulin receptor (IR) and the insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) has been noted in both animal and human type 2 diabetes. Importantly, this appears to occur in all of the major insulin-sensitive tissues, namely the muscle, fat and liver. It is now clear that decreased signalling capacity of the insulin receptor is an important component of this disease. I will review some of the potential mechanisms underlying this deficiency.
95	NR	10377431	Inactivation of the tumor suppressor PTEN gene is found in a variety of human cancers and in cancer predisposition syndromes. Recently, PTEN protein has been shown to possess phosphatase activity on phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate, a product of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. We have identified a homolog of PTEN in Caenorhabditis elegans and have found that it corresponds to the daf-18 gene, which had been defined by a single, phenotypically weak allele, daf-18(e1375). By analyzing an allele, daf-18(nr2037), which bears a deletion of the catalytic portion of CePTEN/DAF-18, we have shown that mutation in daf-18 can completely suppress the dauer-constitutive phenotype caused by inactivation of daf-2 or age-1, which encode an insulin receptor-like molecule and the catalytic subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, respectively. In addition, daf-18(nr2037) dramatically shortens lifespan, both in a wild-type background and in a daf-2 mutant background that normally prolongs lifespan. The lifespan in a daf-18(nr2037) mutant can be restored to essentially that of wild type when combined with a daf-2 mutation. Our studies provide genetic evidence that, in C. elegans, the PTEN homolog DAF-18 functions as a negative regulator of the DAF-2 and AGE-1 signaling pathway, consistent with the notion that DAF-18 acts a phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate phosphatase in vivo. Furthermore, our studies have uncovered a longevity-promoting activity of the PTEN homolog in C. elegans.
95	NR	10352922	Research on insulin action in PCOS has been intensive after the identification of insulin resistance as a feature of the syndrome in 1980. It is now clear that PCOS is a metabolic as well as a reproductive disorder and an important cause of type 2 diabetes mellitus in women. The cellular and molecular mechanisms of insulin resistance in PCOS are distinct from those in other insulin resistance syndromes. Elucidating these mechanisms promises to provide considerable insight into insulin receptor signal specificity. Conversely, insulin resistance is now known to have an important role in the pathogenesis of the reproductive disturbances of PCOS. It is thought that one or several genetic defects may cause both the insulin resistance and reproductive abnormalities characteristic of PCOS.
95	NR	10319328	Cross-talk between insulin-like growth factor (IGF)- and estrogen receptor (ER)-signaling pathways results in synergistic growth. We show here that estrogen enhances IGF signaling by inducing expression of three key IGF-regulatory molecules, the type 1 IGF receptor (IGFR1) and its downstream signaling molecules, insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-1 and IRS-2. Estrogen induction of IGFR1 and IRS expression resulted in enhanced tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1 after IGF-I stimulation, followed by enhanced mitogen-activated protein kinase activation. To examine whether these pathways were similarly activated in vivo, we examined MCF-7 cells grown as xenografts in athymic mice. IRS-1 was expressed at high levels in estrogen-dependent growth of MCF-7 xenografts, but withdrawal of estrogen, which decreased tumor growth, resulted in a dramatic decrease in IRS-1 expression. Finally, we have shown that high IRS-1 expression is an indicator of early disease recurrence in ER-positive human primary breast tumors. Taken together, these data not only reinforce the concept of cross-talk between IGF- and ER-signaling pathways, but indicate that IGF molecules may be critical regulators of estrogen-mediated growth and breast cancer pathogenesis.
95	NR	10231542	In this study, we used maleimidobutyrylbiocytin to examine possible alteration that may occur in the redox state of the insulin receptor (IR) sulfhydryl groups in response to reduced glutathione (GSH) or N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC). Short-term treatment of intact cells expressing large numbers of IR with GSH or NAC led to a rapid and reversible reduction of IR alpha-subunit disulfides, without affecting the receptor beta-subunit thiol reactivity. The overall integrity of the oligomeric structure of IR was maintained, indicating that neither class I nor class II disulfides were targeted by these agents. Similar findings were obtained in cells transfected with IR mutants lacking cysteine524, one of the class I disulfides that link the two IR alpha-subunits. Membrane-associated thiols did not participate in GSH- or NAC-mediated reduction of IR alpha-subunit disulfides. No difference in insulin binding was observed in GSH-treated cells; however, ligand-mediated increases in IR autophosphorylation, tyrosine phosphorylation of cellular substrates, and dual phosphorylation of the downstream target mitogen-activated protein kinase were inhibited at concentrations of GSH (10 mM or greater) that yielded a significant increase in IR alpha-subunit thiol reactivity. GSH did not affect IR signaling in the absence of insulin. Our results provide the first evidence that the IR alpha-subunit contains a select group of disulfides whose redox status can be rapidly altered by the reducing agents GSH and NAC.
95	NR	10210639	Insulin regulates hepatocellular metabolism and growth following insulin receptor (IR) autophosphorylation and activation of the intracellular adapter protein, insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1). IRS-1 activates SH2 domain proteins such as Grb2, which may be vital to hepatocyte growth. To determine if these substances are abnormally expressed under pathophysiologic conditions, IR, IRS-1, Grb2 protein, and IR mRNA were studied in normal human liver (n = 10), cirrhotic liver (n = 10), and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) (n = 10) that had been procured during operative procedures. IR mRNA was quantified by S1-nuclease assay using a 195-bp digoxigenin-labeled IR DNA probe and normalized to the level of expression of the glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) gene. Protein concentrations were determined by immunoblot analysis following SDS-PAGE of liver homogenate samples. Labeled DNA and antibody-complexed protein were detected by chemiluminescent means and quantified by densitometric analysis (mean densitometric units +/- standard error). Similar levels of IR mRNA were observed in normal tissue, cirrhosis, and HCC. IR protein concentration was significantly greater in HCC than in normal liver (1.82 +/- 0.2 vs 1. 25 +/- 0.17; P < 0.05). IRS-1 was significantly increased in cirrhosis compared to normal liver (1.61 +/- 0.31 vs 0.86 +/- 0.21; P < 0.05). No differences were observed in Grb2 in the three tissue types. Insulin receptor overexpression, previously seen in other tumor types, may confer an insulin-mediated growth advantage in HCC if added receptors reflect functional high affinity binding sites. Although an altered mass of IRS-1 protein was not observed in HCC, an IRS-1 increase in cirrhosis may favor hepatic regeneration.
95	NR	10209098	The tumour suppressor gene PTEN (also called MMAC1 or TEP1) is somatically mutated in a variety of cancer types [1] [2] [3] [4]. In addition, germline mutation of PTEN is responsible for two dominantly inherited, related cancer syndromes called Cowden disease and Bannayan-Ruvalcaba-Riley syndrome [4]. PTEN encodes a dual-specificity phosphatase that inhibits cell spreading and migration partly by inhibiting integrin-mediated signalling [5] [6] [7]. Furthermore, PTEN regulates the levels of phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3) by specifically dephosphorylating position 3 on the inositol ring [8]. We report here that the dauer formation gene daf-18 is the Caenorhabditis elegans homologue of PTEN. DAF-18 is a component of the insulin-like signalling pathway controlling entry into diapause and adult longevity that is regulated by the DAF-2 receptor tyrosine kinase and the AGE-1 PI 3-kinase [9]. Others have shown that mutation of daf-18 suppresses the life extension and constitutive dauer formation associated with daf-2 or age-1 mutants. Similarly, we show that inactivation of daf-18 by RNA-mediated interference mimics this suppression, and that a wild-type daf-18 transgene rescues the dauer defect. These results indicate that PTEN/daf-18 antagonizes the DAF-2-AGE-1 pathway, perhaps by catalyzing dephosphorylation of the PIP3 generated by AGE-1. These data further support the notion that mutations of PTEN contribute to the development of human neoplasia through an aberrant activation of the PI 3-kinase signalling cascade.
95	NR	10207053	Insulin-like growth factor II (IGF-II) is a peptide growth factor that is homologous to both insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) and insulin and plays an important role in embryonic development and carcinogenesis. IGF-II is believed to mediate its cellular signaling via the transmembrane tyrosine kinase type 1 insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF-I-R), which is also the receptor for IGF-I. Earlier studies with both cultured cells and transgenic mice, however, have suggested that in the embryo the insulin receptor (IR) may also be a receptor for IGF-II. In most cells and tissues, IR binds IGF-II with relatively low affinity. The IR is expressed in two isoforms (IR-A and IR-B) differing by 12 amino acids due to the alternative splicing of exon 11. In the present study we found that IR-A but not IR-B bound IGF-II with an affinity close to that of insulin. Moreover, IGF-II bound to IR-A with an affinity equal to that of IGF-II binding to the IGF-I-R. Activation of IR-A by insulin led primarily to metabolic effects, whereas activation of IR-A by IGF-II led primarily to mitogenic effects. These differences in the biological effects of IR-A when activated by either IGF-II or insulin were associated with differential recruitment and activation of intracellular substrates. IR-A was preferentially expressed in fetal cells such as fetal fibroblasts, muscle, liver and kidney and had a relatively increased proportion of isoform A. IR-A expression was also increased in several tumors including those of the breast and colon. These data indicate, therefore, that there are two receptors for IGF-II, both IGF-I-R and IR-A. Further, they suggest that interaction of IGF-II with IR-A may play a role both in fetal growth and cancer biology.
95	NR	10188734	The pure antiestrogen ICI 182,780 inhibits insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-dependent proliferation in hormone-responsive breast cancer cells. However, the interactions of ICI 182,780 with IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR) intracellular signaling have not been characterized. Here, we studied the effects of ICI 182,780 on IGF-IR signal transduction in MCF-7 breast cancer cells and in MCF-7-derived clones overexpressing either the IGF-IR or its 2 major substrates, insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) or src/collagen homology proteins (SHC). ICI 182,780 blocked the basal and IGF-I-induced growth in all studied cells in a dose-dependent manner; however, the clones with the greatest IRS-1 overexpression were clearly least sensitive to the drug. Pursuing ICI 182,780 interaction with IRS-1, we found that the antiestrogen reduced IRS-1 expression and tyrosine phosphorylation in several cell lines in the presence or absence of IGF-I. Moreover, in IRS-1-overexpressing cells, ICI 182,780 decreased IRS-1/p85 and IRS-1/GRB2 binding. The effects of ICI 182,780 on IGF-IR protein expression were not significant; however, the drug suppressed IGF-I-induced (but not basal) IGF-IR tyrosine phosphorylation. The expression and tyrosine phosphorylation of SHC as well as SHC/GRB binding were not influenced by ICI 182,780. In summary, downregulation of IRS-1 may represent one of the mechanisms by which ICI 182,780 inhibits the growth of breast cancer cells. Thus, overexpression of IRS-1 in breast tumors could contribute to the development of antiestrogen resistance.
95	NR	10096784	Pancreastatin, a neuropeptide derived from chromogranin A, has a glycogenolytic and counterregulatory effect to insulin in the rat liver. This effect is mediated by calcium and protein kinase C activity. Our aim was to study the possible cross-talk between pancreastatin and the insulin signalling system, by using the well-studied insulin sensitive rat hepatoma HTC cells. First, we checked the counterregulatory effect of pancreastatin on insulin action. Pancreastatin dose-dependently inhibited insulin stimulated glycogen synthesis. This effect was not due to competition for insulin receptors. Moreover, when protein kinase C activation was blocked with staurosporine, this effect of pancreastatin was not observed. Next, we found a dose-dependent inhibition of insulin receptor autophosphorylation by pancreastatin. In addition, phosphorylation of the major substrates of insulin receptor in HTC, i. e. insulin-receptor substrate (IRS)-1/IRS-2 and p62 was also blunted and so was its association with p85 regulatory subunit of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase. Moreover, the insulin activation of S6 kinase was also blocked by pancreastatin. Again, all these inhibitory effects of pancreastatin were prevented by staurosporine. Furthermore, pancreastatin produced Ser/Thr phosphorylation of insulin receptor by a staurosporine-sensitive mechanism. Finally, we checked the pancreastatin activation of protein kinase C in HTC cells and found that a "classical" isoform of this protein is translocated to the plasma membrane. These findings suggest that pancreastatin could exert its anti-insulin effect in the hepatocyte by interrupting the stimulation of early insulin receptor signalling as a result of phosphorylation. This interaction might have a role in the mechanisms of insulin resistance.
95	NR	10082579	The coordinated interplay of substrate adhesion and deadhesion is necessary for cell motility. Using MCF-7 cells, we found that insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) induces the adhesion of MCF-7 to vitronectin and collagen in a dose- and time-dependent manner, suggesting that IGF-I triggers the activation of different integrins. On the other hand, IGF-I promotes the association of insulin receptor substrate 1 with the focal adhesion kinase (FAK), paxillin, and the tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2, resulting in FAK and paxillin dephosphorylation. Abrogation of SHP-2 catalytic activity with a dominant-negative mutant (SHP2-C>S) abolishes IGF-I-induced FAK dephosphorylation, and cells expressing SHP2-C>S show reduced IGF-I-stimulated chemotaxis compared with either mock- or SHP-2 wild-type-transfected cells. This impairment of cell migration is recovered by reintroduction of a catalytically active SHP-2. Interestingly, SHP-2-C>S cells show a larger number of focal adhesion contacts than wild-type cells, suggesting that SHP-2 activity participates in the integrin deactivation process. Although SHP-2 regulates mitogen-activated protein kinase activity, the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase inhibitor PD-98059 has only a marginal effect on MCF-7 cell migration. The role of SHP-2 as a general regulator of cell chemotaxis induced by other chemotactic agents and integrins is discussed.
95	NR	10077613	The human PTEN tumor suppressor gene is mutated in a wide variety of sporadic tumors. To determine the function of PTEN in vivo we have studied a PTEN homolog in Caenorhabditis elegans. We have generated a strong loss-of-function allele of the PTEN homolog and shown that the deficient strain is unable to enter dauer diapause. An insulin-like phosphatidylinositol 3-OH kinase (PI3'K) signaling pathway regulates dauer-stage entry. Mutations in either the daf-2 insulin receptor-like (IRL) gene or the age-1 encoded PI3'K catalytic subunit homolog cause constitutive dauer formation and also affect the life span, brood size, and metabolism of nondauer animals. Strikingly, loss-of-function mutations in the age-1 PI3'K and daf-2 IRL genes are suppressed by loss-of-function mutations in the PTEN homolog. We establish that the PTEN homolog is encoded by daf-18, a previously uncloned gene that has been shown to interact genetically with the DAF-2 IRL AGE-1 PI3'K signaling pathway. This interaction provides clear genetic evidence that PTEN acts to antagonize PI3'K function in vivo. Given the conservation of the PI3'K signaling pathway between C. elegans and mammals, the analysis of daf-18 PTEN mutant nematodes should shed light on the role of human PTEN in the etiology of metabolic disease, aging, and cancer.
95	NR	10065161	Insulin action is initiated by binding to its cognate receptor, which then triggers multiple cellular responses by activating different signaling pathways. There is evidence that insulin receptor signaling may involve G protein activation in different target cells. We have studied the activation of G proteins in rat hepatoma (HTC) cells. We found that insulin stimulated binding of guanosine 5'-O-(3-thiotriphosphate) (GTP-gamma-35S) to plasma membrane proteins of HTC cells, in a dose-dependent manner. This effect was completely blocked by pertussis toxin treatment of the membranes, suggesting the involvement of G proteins of the G alpha i/G alpha o family. The expression of these G alpha proteins was checked by Western blotting. Next, we used blocking antibodies to sort out the specific G alpha protein activated by insulin stimulation. Anti-G alpha il,2 antibodies completely prevented insulin-stimulated GTP binding, whereas anti-G alpha o,i3 did not modify this effect of insulin on GTP binding. Moreover, we found physical association of the insulin receptor with G alpha il,2 by copurification studies. These results further support the involvement of a pertussis toxin-sensitive G protein in insulin receptor signaling and provides some evidence of specific association and activation of G alpha il,2 protein by insulin. These findings suggest that G alpha il,2 proteins might be involved in insulin action.
95	NR	10026153	Increased expression of the insulin-like growth factor-I receptor (IGF-IR) protein-tyrosine kinase occurs in several kinds of cancer and induces neoplastic transformation in fibroblast cell lines. The transformed phenotype can be reversed by interfering with the function of the IGF-IR. The IGF-IR is required for transformation by a number of viral and cellular oncoproteins, including SV40 large T antigen, Ras, Raf, and Src. The IGF-IR is a substrate for Src in vitro and is phosphorylated in v-Src-transformed cells. We observed that the IGF-IR and IR associated with the C-terminal Src kinase (CSK) following ligand stimulation. We found that the SH2 domain of CSK binds to the tyrosine-phosphorylated form of IGF-IR and IR. We determined the tyrosine residues in the IGF-IR and in the IR responsible for this interaction. We also observed that fibroblasts stimulated with IGF-I or insulin showed a rapid and transient decrease in c-Src tyrosine kinase activity. The results suggest that c-Src and CSK are involved in IGF-IR and IR signaling and that the interaction of CSK with the IGF-IR may play a role in the decrease in c-Src activity following IGF-I stimulation.
95	NR	9884156	Chronic ethanol toxicity impairs liver regeneration, inhibits DNA synthesis, and mutes cellular responses to growth factor stimulation. Previous studies demonstrated that the adverse effects of ethanol are mediated by inhibition of tyrosyl phosphorylation of the insulin receptor and the insulin receptor substrate-type 1 (IRS-1). However, overexpression of IRS-1 leads to increased DNA synthesis and cellular transformation due to constitutive activation of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase. The present study examines the effects of ethanol on insulin signaling through IRS-1 in FOCUS hepatocellular carcinoma cells, which overexpress IRS-1, to determine whether such cells were resistant to the inhibitory effects of ethanol. The results demonstrated that ethanol treatment (100 mM) caused 30 to 50% reductions in the levels of insulin-stimulated tyrosyl phosphorylation of the insulin receptor beta-subunit, tyrosyl phosphorylation of IRS-1, phosphorylation of Erk2, association of phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase with tyrosyl-phosphorylated IRS-1, and MAP kinase and phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase activities. In contrast, ethanol treatment had no effect on epidermal growth factor-stimulated tyrosyl phosphorylation of Shc. Corresponding with the pronounced inhibition of MAP kinase, ethanol treatment resulted in 30 to 50% reductions in the expression levels of two important insulin-responsive genes: glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). The findings suggest that, in FOCUS hepatocellular carcinoma cells, which overexpress IRS-1, ethanol treatment substantially inhibits IRS-1 and MAP kinase signaling and growth-associated gene expression, but has no effect on Shc phosphorylation, which activates p21ras through an IRS-1 independent pathway.
95	NR	9878535	Cross-talk between steroid hormones and polypeptide growth factors regulates the growth of hormone-responsive breast cancer cells. For example, in the MCF-7 human breast cancer cell line, insulin up-regulates estrogen receptor (ER) content and binding capacity. Since the insulin receptor (IR) substrate 1 (IRS-1) is one of the core signaling elements transmitting mitogenic and metabolic effects of insulin, we investigated whether IRS-1 is also required for the insulin-induced function of the ER. The effects of insulin on the ER were compared in MCF-7 cells and MCF-7-derived cell lines with decreased levels (by approximately 80%) of IRS-1 due to the expression of IRS-1 antisense RNA. The severe IRS-1 deficiency in MCF-7 cells was associated with (1) reduced mitogenic response to 20 ng/ml insulin and 10% calf serum (CS), but not to 1 nM estradiol (E2); (2) loss of insulin-E2 synergism; (3) up-regulation of ER protein expression and binding capacity; and (4) loss of insulin-induced regulation of ER tyrosine phosphorylation. In conclusion, the data confirm the existence of the IR-ER cross-talk and suggest that IRS-1-dependent signaling may contribute to the negative regulation of the ER expression and function in MCF-7 cells.
95	NR	9856413	Almost two decades of research have greatly increased our knowledge in the complex field of metabolic aberrations in polycystic ovary syndrome, but still many problems remain unsolved. The statistical association between insulin levels and androgens originally put the focus on possible direct cause-and-effect relationships between these factors. Indeed there is evidence that insulin may affect ovarian functions in multiple ways, presumably in some cases causing anovulation and hyperandrogenism. Clearly, insulin may increase biologically active testosterone through reducing SHBG levels. Conversely, major increases in androgen levels may induce muscular changes leading to reduced insulin-mediated glucose uptake. There are suggestions of increased steroidogenesis in both ovarian and adrenal pathways, with the net result of increased androgen production. There are also findings supporting increased corticosteroid production, which could contribute to insulin resistance directly or through promoting accumulation of abdominal fat, a typical feature of over-weight women with PCOS. Free fatty acids, released in great amounts from abdominal fat, may induce insulin resistance. Insulin resistance may also be due to a primary aberration in the insulin receptor. Putatively increased serine phosphorylation may cause both impairment of the insulin signal and increased 17,20 lyase activity, thus suggesting a common cause for insulin resistance and increased androgen production. There are also findings supporting a high prevalence of beta-cell dysfunction in PCOS, ranging from increased insulin secretion, not explained by insulin resistance or BMI, to failing beta-cell function, mainly in obese women during progress to glucose intolerance and NIDDM. Recent genetic findings also support a multifactorial genesis to PCOS, notably with positive findings both in genes regulating steroidogenesis and insulin secretion. It is suggested that PCOS is the result of "thrifty" genes, providing advantages in times of shortage of nutrition such as muscular strength, moderate abdominal fatness and decreased insulin sensitivity, i.e. an anabolic, energy saving constitution. However, when this constitution is exposed to unlimited food supplies and modern sedentary life style a full-blown PCOS with insulin resistance and infertility is triggered, presumably via several mechanisms, which follow a logical amplification system between two basic anabolic hormones, insulin and testosterone.
95	NR	9852124	The major substrates for the type I insulin-like growth factor (IGF-I) receptor are Shc and insulin receptor substrate (IRS) proteins. In the current study, we report that IGF-I induces a sustained tyrosine phosphorylation of Shc and its association with Grb2 in SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells. The time course of Shc tyrosine phosphorylation parallels the time course of IGF-I-stimulated activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK). Transfection of SH-SY5Y cells with a p52 Shc mutant decreases Shc tyrosine phosphorylation and Shc-Grb2 association. This results in the inhibition of IGF-I-mediated ERK tyrosine phosphorylation and neurite outgrowth. In contrast, IGF-I induces a transient tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-2 and an association of IRS-2 with Grb2. The time course of IRS-2 tyrosine phosphorylation and IRS-2-Grb2 and IRS-2-p85 association closely resembles the time course of IGF-I-mediated membrane ruffling. Treating cells with the phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase inhibitors wortmannin and LY294002 blocks IGF-I-induced membrane ruffling. The ERK kinase inhibitor PD98059, as well as transfection with the p52 Shc mutant, has no effect on IGF-I-mediated membrane ruffling. Immunolocalization studies show IRS-2 and Grb2, but not Shc, concentrated at the tip of the extending growth cone where membrane ruffling is most active. Collectively, these results suggest that the association of Shc with Grb2 is essential for IGF-I-mediated neurite outgrowth, whereas the IRS-2-Grb2-phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase complex may regulate growth cone extension and membrane ruffling.
95	NR	9832424	Insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) is a potent neurotropic factor promoting the differentiation and survival of neuronal cells. SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells are a well characterized in vitro model of nervous system growth. We report here that IGF-I stimulated the tyrosine phosphorylation of the type I IGF receptor (IGF-IR) and insulin receptor substrate-2 (IRS-2) in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. These cells lacked IRS-1. After being tyrosine phosphorylated, IRS-2 associated transiently with downstream signaling molecules, including phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3-K) and Grb2. Treatment of the cells with PI 3-K inhibitors (wortmannin and LY294002) increased IGF-I-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-2. We also observed a concomitant increase in the mobility of IRS-2, suggesting that PI 3-K mediates or is required for IRS-2 serine/threonine phosphorylation, and that this phosphorylation inhibits IRS-2 tyrosine phosphorylation. Treatment with PI 3-K inhibitors induced an increased association of IRS-2 with Grb2, probably as a result of the increased IRS-2 tyrosine phosphorylation. However, even though the PI 3-K inhibitors enhanced the association of Grb2 with IRS-2, these compounds suppressed IGF-I-induced mitogen-activated protein kinase activation and neurite outgrowth. Together, these results indicate that although PI 3-K participates in a negative regulation of IRS-2 tyrosine phosphorylation, its activity is required for IGF-IR-mediated mitogen-activated protein kinase activation and neurite outgrowth.
95	NR	9822658	The roles of protein-tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) in processes such as cell growth and adhesion are poorly understood. To explore the ability of specific PTPs to regulate cell signaling pathways initiated by stimulation of growth factor receptors, we expressed the receptor-like PTP, PTPalpha, in A431 epidermoid carcinoma cells. These cells express high levels of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor and proliferate in response to the autocrine production of transforming growth factor-alpha. Conversely, EGF stimulation of A431 cells in vitro leads to growth inhibition and triggers the rapid detachment of these cells from the substratum. Although PTPalpha expression did not alter the growth characteristics of either unstimulated or EGF-stimulated cells, this phosphatase was associated with increased cell-substratum adhesion. Furthermore, PTPalpha-expressing A431 cells were strikingly resistant to EGF-induced cell rounding. Overexpression of PTPalpha in A431 cells was associated with the dephosphorylation/activation of specific Src family kinases, suggesting a potential mechanism for the observed alteration in A431 cell-substratum adhesion. Src kinase activation was dependent on the D1 catalytic subunit of PTPalpha, and there was evidence of association between PTPalpha and Src kinase(s). PTPalpha expression also led to increased association of Src kinase with the integrin-associated focal adhesion kinase, pp125(FAK). In addition, paxillin, a Src and/or pp125(FAK) substrate, displayed increased levels of tyrosine phosphorylation in PTPalpha-expressing cells and was associated with elevated amounts of Csk. In view of these alterations in focal adhesion-associated molecules in PTPalpha-expressing A431 cells, as well as the changes in adhesion demonstrated by these cells, we propose that PTPalpha may have a role in regulating cell-substratum adhesion.
95	NR	9821805	Herbimycin A is widely used as an inhibitor of Src family protein tyrosine kinases but is also reported to induce the downregulation of epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor number in A431 cells without inhibiting its tyrosine kinase activity. To determine the specificity of the receptor downregulation, we examined its effect on a variety of cell lines which express different levels of EGF receptor and on other tyrosine kinase receptors. Long-term herbimycin A treatment decreased the amounts of all the tyrosine kinase receptors examined in a dose-dependent manner. It also reduced ligand-stimulated receptor autophosphorylation in accordance with the reduction in the receptor level. Herbimycin A inhibited platelet derived growth factor (PDGF)-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of cellular proteins and DNA synthesis in NIH3T3 cells but did not affect the serum-stimulated DNA synthesis. PDGF-induced tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of c-Src was inhibited but the protein level of c-Src was not reduced by herbimycin A. The reduced level of c-Src kinase activity correlated with the levels of both PDGF receptor and DNA synthesis. These results indicate that the herbimycin A treatment selectively downregulates receptor tyrosine kinases, independent of the number of receptors, and suggest that c-Src is to some degree involved in the selective inhibition of PDGF-induced mitogenesis by herbimycin A.
95	NR	9816050	Deregulated signal transduction via the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor family of tyrosine protein kinase growth factor receptors is associated with proliferative diseases such as cancer and psoriasis. In an attempt to selectively block signal transduction from the EGF receptor, we have synthesized a new class of dianilino-phthalimide tyrosine protein kinase inhibitors with selectivity for the EGF receptor tyrosine protein kinase. 4, 5-Dianilino-phthalimide (DAPH 1) was metabolized in vitro by mouse liver fractions and in vivo. The major metabolite has been identified as 4-(4-hydroxyanilino)-5-anilino-phthalimide. To specifically block this biotransformation (hydroxylation), we have synthesized 4,5-bis(4-fluoroanilino)phthalimide (DAPH 2), a potent and selective EGF receptor tyrosine protein kinase inhibitor. DAPH 2 inhibits the EGF receptor and protein kinase C beta2 enzymes with equal potency. In cells, DAPH 2 inhibits signal output from the EGF receptor, but not from other classes of receptor protein tyrosine kinases, such as the platelet-derived growth factor receptor, fibroblast growth factor receptor, insulin-like growth factor I receptor, and insulin receptor. Selective antitumor activity was demonstrated in vivo at well-tolerated doses in mice. This publication describes the biological profile of DAPH 2 and investigates its cellular and in vivo mechanism of action.
95	NR	9815941	The synergistic action of estrogens and insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) promotes the growth of many human breast cancer cell lines. This synergistic effect involves estrogen-dependent induction of the IGF system, i.e., estrogens augment the number of IGF-I receptors, stimulate the secretion of IGF-II, and promote the synthesis of certain IGF-binding proteins. On the other hand, the sustained activation of the IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR) by the overexpression of IGF-II has been found to contribute to the development of the estrogen-independent phenotype in breast cancer cells. In this study, we have investigated whether the amplification of the IGF-IR intracellular signaling in MCF-7 cells can abolish or reduce estrogen requirements for growth and transformation. To this end we developed several MCF-7 clones that overexpressed insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1), one of the principal substrates of the IGF-IR. We report here that in MCF-7 cells overexpressing IRS-1, estrogen requirements for growth in monolayer culture as well as in soft agar were reduced. The decreased estrogen requirements depended on the level of the overexpressed IRS-1 protein, and in cells which contained several-fold more functional IRS-1 than the parental cells, we observed total loss of estrogen dependence for growth. In addition, the importance of IRS-1 in proliferation of MCF-7 cells has been confirmed through the use of antisense strategies.
95	NR	9815544	Insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) interact with specific cell surface receptors to mediate cell growth. Intracellular effects of the IGFs are mediated by activation of secondary messenger molecules. One of these proteins, insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1), is phosphorylated after type I IGF receptor activation and has a major role in IGF signaling. Receptor activation also is influenced by high-affinity IGF binding proteins (IGFBPs). In serum, IGFBP-3 is the predominant species. The role of IGFBP-3 in the regulation of breast cancer cell growth is unclear; both growth inhibition and stimulation have been documented in tissue culture systems. To investigate the influence of IGFBP-3 and IRS-1 in breast cancer, we measured levels of these proteins by ELISA and immunoblotting in 195 node-negative primary human breast cancers and compared their levels with known prognostic factors and disease-free survival (DFS). IGFBP-3 levels correlated positively with tumor size (r = 0.27, P < 0.0001) and negatively with estrogen receptor (r = -0.35, P < 0. 0001) and progesterone receptor (r = -0.16, P = 0.021). In contrast, IRS-1 did not correlate with prognostic factors, but higher levels of IRS-1 predicted worse DFS for the subset of patients with tumors </=2 cm (P = 0.04), and for patients with estrogen receptor-positive tumors, there was a trend toward worse DFS (P = 0.06). These results suggest that higher tumor levels of IGFBP-3 are associated with worse features in breast cancer. However, IGFBP-3 was not an independent prognostic factor. In contrast, high levels of IRS-1 in the tumors predicted a higher incidence of recurrence, suggesting that IRS-1-mediated signaling in breast tumors may be involved in the growth regulation of breast cancer.
95	NR	9809695	NA
95	NR	9790298	BACKGROUND: Integrins are cell surface receptors which, in part, mediate the adhesion of cells to the extracellular matrix. In addition to providing a molecular "glue" essential for tissue organization and survival, integrins are dynamic signaling molecules. Integrins allow normal, nontransformed cells to sense that they are adhered to the extracellular matrix, thus providing a cell survival signal. This signal allows cells to proliferate in the presence of growth factors and in some instances prevents apoptosis. Integrins also mediate cell migration as it occurs in normal processes such as angiogenesis, wound healing, immune system function, and development. Aberrances in the expression and function of integrins contribute to many disease states including cancer. RESULTS: Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) becomes phosphorylated and activated during integrin-mediated cell adhesion. Focal adhesion kinase is a signal transducer of integrins (and certain soluble growth factors). Cells derived from FAK -/- mouse embryos exhibit reduced migration relative to wild-type cells. Cells which overexpress FAK show increased migration relative to wild-type cells. Focal adhesion kinase promotes cell survival under certain in vitro conditions. Focal adhesion kinase is overexpressed in invasive and metastatic colon, breast, thyroid, and prostate cancers. Enhanced FAK immunostaining is detected in small populations of preinvasive (carcinoma in situ) oral cancers and in large populations of cells in invasive oral cancers. CONCLUSIONS: Focal adhesion kinase is probably not a classical oncogene but may be involved in the progression of cancer to invasion and metastasis. It is hypothesized that overexpression of FAK in subpopulations of tumor cells leads to populations of cells with a high propensity toward invasion and metastasis. Focal adhesion kinase would have a dual role in this regard: Overexpression of FAK leads to (1) increased cell migration and (2) increased cell survival under anchorage-independent conditions. Further work is needed to test this model and to determine whether FAK represents a viable target for anticancer therapy.
95	NR	9766646	Insulin receptor substrate-2 (IRS-2) is a multisite docking protein implicated in mitogenic signaling after activation of the insulin and insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I receptors. In the present study, we characterized IRS-2 expression and function in human pancreatic cancer. IRS-2 mRNA and protein were expressed in ASPC-1 and COLO-357 human pancreatic cancer cell lines. Insulin, IGF-I, and IGF-II enhanced the growth of both cell lines, stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-2, and increased IRS-2-associated phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3-kinase activity. The mitogenic effects of insulin, IGF-I, and IGF-II were markedly attenuated by the PI 3-kinase inhibitor LY 294002. Northern blot analysis of total RNA extracted from normal and cancerous tissues revealed that IRS-2 mRNA levels were increased in the cancer tissues (P = 0.032). In the normal pancreas, IRS-2 immunoreactivity was present at low levels in some ductal and acinar cells and at moderate levels in a heterogeneous pattern in all of the endocrine islets. In the pancreatic cancers, IRS-2 was abundant in the ductal-like cancer cells. These findings indicate that IRS-2 is overexpressed in human pancreatic cancer and suggest that it may contribute to enhanced mitogenic signaling via the PI 3-kinase pathway, thereby leading to excessive growth stimulation in this malignancy.
95	NR	9711989	Insulin resistance in polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is characterized by a novel defect in insulin signal transduction expressed in isolated human adipocytes as impaired insulin sensitivity for glucose transport and antilipolysis. To determine whether this is a generalized defect of a potentially genetic basis, or possibly a tissue-specific one, fibroblast cultures were established from age- and weight-matched obese normal cycling (NC; n = 5) and PCOS (n = 6) subjects. Adipocytes from the current PCOS subjects displayed impaired sensitivity for glucose transport stimulation (half-maximal effective concentration [EC50], 317 +/- 58 pmol/L in PCOS v 130 +/- 40 in NC; P < .025). Specific insulin binding was similar in fibroblasts from NC (0.57% +/- 0.10%/10(6) cells) and PCOS (0.45% +/- 0.10%) subjects. Fibroblasts from NC (4.9- +/- 0.5-fold stimulation) and PCOS (4.6- +/- 0.3-fold) subjects were equally responsive to insulin for stimulation of glucose incorporation into glycogen. Insulin sensitivity for glycogen synthesis in fibroblasts did not differ between NC (EC50, 9.6 +/- 0.9 nmol/L) and PCOS (9.1 +/- 0.9) cells. For thymidine incorporation into DNA, relative insulin responsiveness was similar in NC (2.3- +/- 0.3-fold stimulation) and PCOS (2.1- +/- 0.1-fold) fibroblasts. Insulin sensitivity for DNA synthesis was similar in NC (EC50, 12.9 +/- 2.4 nmol/L) and PCOS (7.6 +/- 1.3) cells. In summary, (1) insulin receptor binding is normal in PCOS fibroblasts; and (2) PCOS fibroblasts have normal insulin sensitivity and responsiveness for metabolic and mitogenic responses. Impaired insulin signal transduction, while present in adipocytes from a group of PCOS subjects, is not found in fibroblasts from the same subjects. This defect is not generalized to all cell types, but may be limited to specific tissues and responses.
95	NR	9690379	Extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases are highly activated in an in vivo rat model of colorectal carcinogenesis. In addition, other protein kinases such as c-Src and c-Yes have been shown to be up-regulated in some human colon cancers. To evaluate the activity of these kinases in human colorectal carcinomas, we examined colon cancers and adjacent normal intestinal mucosa from 11 patients. Moderate increases in ERK and JNK activities, in addition to up-regulation of c-Src, p125FAK, and tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins, were observed in a subset of the colorectal carcinomas. There was a significant correlation found between levels of c-Src, p125FAK, and tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins, as well as between c-Src protein levels and JNK activity. This is the first report that examines several different kinases as markers to characterize colorectal cancers in the same carcinoma sample, allowing the determination of correlations between markers in the same tumors.
95	NR	9671232	In many human breast cancers and cultured cell lines, insulin receptor expression is elevated, and insulin, via its own insulin receptor, can stimulate cell growth. It has recently been demonstrated that the enzyme phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3-K) mediates various aspects of insulin receptor signaling including cell growth. In order to understand the mechanisms for insulin-stimulated cell growth in human breast cancer, we measured insulin-stimulable PI3-K activity in a non-transformed breast epithelial cell line, MCF-10A, and in two malignantly transformed cell lines, ZR-75-1 and MDA-MB157. All three cell lines express comparable amounts of insulin receptors whose tyrosine autophosphorylation is increased by insulin, and in these cell lines insulin stimulates growth. In MDA-MB157 and MCF-10A cells, insulin stimulated PI3-K activity three- to fourfold. In ZR-75-1 cells, however, insulin did not stimulate PI3-K activity. In ZR-75-1 cells PI3-K protein was present, and its activity was stimulated by epidermal growth factor, suggesting that there might be a defect in insulin receptor signaling upstream of PI3-K and downstream of the insulin receptor. Next, we studied insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1), a major endogenous substrate for the insulin receptor which, when tyrosine is phosphorylated by the insulin receptor, interacts with and activates PI3-K. In ZR-75-1 cells, there were reduced levels of protein for IRS-1. In these cells, both Shc tyrosine phosphorylation and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAP-K) activity were increased by the insulin receptor (indicating that the p21ras pathway may account for insulin-stimulated cell growth in ZR-75-1 cells). The PI3-K inhibitor LY294002 (50 microM) reduced insulin-stimulated growth in MCF-10A and MDA-MB157 cell lines, whereas it did not modify insulin effect on ZR-75-1 cell growth. The MAP-K/Erk (MEK) inhibitor PD98059 (50 microM) consistently reduced insulin-dependent growth in all three cell lines. Taken together, these data suggest that in breast cancer cells insulin may stimulate cell growth via PI3-K-dependent or-independent pathways.
95	NR	9670943	Accumulating evidence indicates that the Src homology 2-containing tyrosine phosphatase 2 (SHP-2) plays an important role in signal transduction through receptor tyrosine kinase and cytokine receptors. In most models, SHP-2 appears to be a positive mediator of signaling. However, coligation of Fc gamma RIIB1 with B cell Ag receptors (BCR) inhibits BCR-mediated signaling by a mechanism that may involve recruitment of phosphatases SHP-1, SHP-2, and the SH2 containing inositol 5'phosphatase (SHIP) to the phosphorylated Fc gamma RIIB1 immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motif. The role of SHP-2 in BCR-mediated cell activation and in Fc gamma RIIB1-mediated inhibitory signaling is unclear. In this study we assessed the association of SHP-2 with phosphotyrosine-containing cellular protein(s) before and after stimulation through these receptors. BCR stimulation induced the association of SHP-2 with a single major tyrosyl-phosphorylated molecule (pp120) that had an apparent molecular mass of 120 kDa. Coligation of Fc gamma RIIB1 with BCR led to a rapid decrease in SHP-2 association with pp120. Analysis of the subcellular localization of pp120 showed that the complex of SHP-2 and tyrosyl-phosphorylated p120 occurs predominantly in the cytosol. Furthermore, the binding of the two molecules was mediated by the interaction of tyrosyl-phosphorylated p120 with the SHP-2 N-terminal SH2 domain. These findings indicate that SHP-2 and pp120 function in BCR signaling, and this function may be inhibited by Fc gamma RIIB1 signaling.
95	NR	9648831	Certain nutrients and growth factors can stimulate pancreatic beta-cell growth. However, the appropriate mitogenic signaling pathways in beta-cells have been relatively undefined. In this study, differential gene expression in NEDH rat insulinoma was compared with NEDH rat primary islet beta-cells. Differential mRNA display analysis revealed an elevated expression in insulinoma of VL30 transposons, S24 ribosomal protein, and cytochrome-C oxidaseVIIc that is typical for cells undergoing mitosis. A gene candidate approach revealed that mRNA levels of the oncogenes c-fos and c-jun were equivalently expressed in insulinoma and islet cells, as was the mRNA for the mitogenic signal transduction molecule insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-1. However, in contrast to that of IRS-1, IRS-2 gene expression was 60- to 70-fold higher in the insulinoma tissue compared with islets, which was reflected at the protein as well as the mRNA level. The specific elevated IRS-2 expression was a consistent observation across all rodent pancreatic beta-cell lines. To investigate whether IRS-2 was functional, serum-stimulated beta-cell proliferation was examined in isolated insulinoma cells. After a 48-h period of serum withdrawal, 24 h of serum refeeding rendered an 8- to 10-fold increase in [3H]thymidine incorporation into insulinoma cells. This serum-stimulated DNA synthesis was prevented by inhibitors of tyrosine protein kinase and phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3-kinase activities, as well as the activation of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase and p70S6K. Examination of IRS-mediated signal transduction pathways indicated that after 10-15 min of serum refeeding, there was increased tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-2 and pp60, and PI 3-kinase recruitment to IRS-2. Serum also increased the association of growth factor-bound protein 2/murine sons of sevenless 1 protein to a PI 3-kinase/IRS-2 protein complex. Moreover, serum also activated MAP-kinase (erk-1 and erk-2 isoforms) and 70 kD S6 kinase. Thus IRS-mediated signal transduction pathways are functional in pancreatic beta-cells. It is conceivable that IRS-2 expression in beta-cells contributes to maintaining the islet beta-cell population, complementary to observations in the IRS-2 knockout mouse in which beta-cell mass is markedly reduced.
95	NR	9626659	The alpha-estrogen receptor (ER alpha) transcriptional activity can be regulated either by binding to the cognate ligand or by intracellular signaling pathways responsive to a variety of factors acting through cell membrane receptors. Studies carried out in HeLa and COS-1 cells demonstrated that the cross-coupling between estrogen and growth factor receptors is mediated by p21ras and requires phosphorylation of a specific serine residue (Ser 118 in the human ER alpha and Ser 122 in mouse ER alpha) located in the ER alpha N-terminal activation function 1 (AF-1). Likewise, in the SK-N-BE neuroblastoma cell line p21ras is involved in the cross-coupling between insulin and ER alpha receptors. However, in this cell line Ser 122 is not necessary for insulin-dependent activation of unliganded ER alpha. In addition, after insulin activation, the electrophoretic mobility associated to serine hyperphosphorylation of ER alpha in SK-N-BE and in COS-1 cells is different. Our study rules out the possibility of tyrosine phosphorylation in unliganded ER alpha activation by means of transactivation studies of ER alpha tyrosine mutants and analysis of Tyr phosphorylation immunoreactivity. The two cofactors for steroid receptors RIP 140 and SRC-1 do not seem to be specifically involved in the insulin-induced ER alpha transactivation. The present study demonstrates the possibility of an alternative, cell-specific pathway of cross-coupling between intracellular and membrane receptors, which might be of importance for the understanding of the physiological significance of this mode of activation in the nervous system.
95	NR	9626131	To determine whether insulin stimulates human ovarian testosterone production in the polycystic ovary syndrome by activating its own receptor and using inositolglycan mediators as the signal transduction system, thecal cells from polycystic ovary syndrome women were isolated and cultured. Insulin and insulin-like growth factor I stimulated thecal testosterone biosynthesis. Antibody blockade of the insulin receptor abolished insulin's stimulatory action, whereas effective antibody blockade of the insulin-like growth factor I receptor did not alter insulin's stimulation of thecal testosterone biosynthesis. A chiro-inositol containing glycan (INS-2) increased thecal testosterone biosynthesis. Preincubation of cells with an antiinositolglycan antibody (A23939 or alpha IGP) abolished insulin's stimulatory effect, but not that of hCG. These findings suggest that inositolglycans serve as the signal transduction system for insulin's stimulation of human thecal testosterone biosynthesis.
95	NR	9605520	In mammalian cells, the insulin receptor substrate 1 protein (IRS-1) is a specific substrate for insulin and IGF-1 receptor tyrosine kinases which is involved in mediating metabolic and mitogenic actions of insulin and IGFs. In order to determine if IRS-1 is also essential in a chicken derived hepatoma cell line (LMH cells), IRS-1 gene has been invalidated in these cells. For this, we subcloned chicken IRS-1 gene in an antisense orientation into a mammalian expression vector driven by the cytomegalovirus early promoter. LMH cells were stably transfected with this construct or with the empty vector carrying only the neomycin resistance gene and selected for cIRS-1 expression. One subclone, C2, showed a complete repression of cIRS-1 expression at both protein and mRNA levels. Proliferation of C2 cells was dramatically reduced (54%) compared with Neo(r) cells. Furthermore this reduction was accompanied by a decrease in insulin-dependent [3H]thymidine incorporation, indicating a reduction in DNA synthesis. Insulin-dependent [U-14C]glucose incorporation into cellular lipids was also significantly reduced in C2 cell line suggesting an alteration in lipogenesis. In wild type LMH cells, SHC which is involved in Ras pathway, also served as a substrate for insulin receptor tyrosine kinase. In C2 cells, SHC expression, its association with the insulin receptor and its tyrosine phosphorylation were largely increased. Two forms of the regulatory subunit of PI 3-kinase were present: p85 and p55 forms. Furthermore, C2 cells displayed increased basal phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3'-kinase activity. This report demonstrates a role for cIRS-1 in the metabolic and mitogenic actions of insulin in LMH cells. However, the overexpression of cIRS-1 antisense did not completely abolish cell proliferation. This may be explained by the exacerbation of an alternative pathway that only partly compensate for the knocking out of cIRS-1 gene: the overexpression of SHC.
95	NR	9545345	Because insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I), insulin, and interleukin-4 (IL-4) have known biological effects in breast cancer cells and signal through insulin-receptor substrate (IRS) adaptor proteins, we examined the expression and function of IRS-1 and IRS-2 in breast tumors and cell lines. IRS-1 and IRS-2 were expressed by cell lines and primary breast tumor specimens. IGF-I, insulin, and IL-4 treatment of MCF-7 and ZR-75, and IGF-I treatment of T47-D breast cancer cells, resulted in much greater tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1 compared with IRS-2. Furthermore, IGF-I stimulated greater tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1 than either insulin or IL-4. IGF-I treatment also enhanced association of the p85 regulatory subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase with IRS-1 and stimulated increased enzymatic activity compared with IL-4 and insulin in all three cell lines. Similarly, mitogen-activated protein kinase activity was greater in IGF-I-stimulated cells. To determine the functional significance of the activation of these pathways, we inhibited activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase with wortmannin and mitogen-activated protein kinase with PD098059. Both compounds inhibited IGF-stimulated growth, suggesting that both pathways contributed to the mitogenic response to IGF-I. We conclude that IRS-1, and not IRS-2, is the predominant signaling molecule activated by IGF-I, insulin, and IL-4. Furthermore, enhanced tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1 by IGF-I, compared with either insulin or IL-4, is associated with greater activation of mitogenic downstream signaling pathways resulting in enhanced cell growth.
95	NR	9545332	The interleukin (IL)-4 receptor alpha-chain (IL-4Ralpha) contains a sequence motif (488PLVIAGNPAYRSFSD) termed the insulin IL-4 receptor motif (I4R motif). Mutation of the central Tyr497 to Phe blocks the tyrosine phosphorylation of the insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS1) and diminishes proliferation in response to IL-4. Recent data suggest that the I4R motif encodes binding sites for several protein tyrosine binding (PTB) domain-containing proteins such as IRS1 and Shc and potentially for the Src homology 2 domain of signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6). To analyze the function of the I4R motif in regulating IL-4 signaling, we changed conserved residues upstream and downstream of the central Tyr to Ala in the human IL-4Ralpha. We analyzed the ability of these constructs to signal the tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS2 and STAT6, the induction of DNA binding activity, and CD23 induction in response to human IL-4 (huIL-4) in transfected M12.4.1 cells. Mutagenesis of residues downstream of Tyr497, such as Arg498 or Phe500, to Ala had no effect on any of these responses, suggesting that the I4R motif may not be important for functional Src homology 2 domain interactions. However, mutagenesis of Pro488 to Ala (P488A) greatly diminished the tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS2 and abolished tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT6, induction of DNA binding activity, and CD23 induction in response to huIL-4. By contrast, a P488G mutant signaled these responses to huIL-4. Mutagenesis of hydrophobic amino acids previously shown to contact the PTB domain of IRS1, Leu489 or Ile491, to Ala had only minimal effects on responses to huIL-4. However, changing both Leu498 and Ile491 to Ala greatly diminished the tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS2 and abolished STAT6 activation. Taken together, these results indicate the important role of the I4R motif in regulating IRS docking and suggest that I4R docking to a PTB domain-containing protein regulates activation of the STAT6 pathway.
95	NR	9582514	A proliferative effect of insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) was previously shown in pancreatic islets. However, the mechanism under which IGF-I actions are exerted in insulin-secreting cells is not clear. The rat insulinoma cell line, RINm5F, was shown to have both IGF-I receptors and IGF-Il/mannose-6-phosphate receptors. IGF-I binding to cell surface receptors stimulated phosphorylation of 97 kDa and 93 kDa subunits of the IGF-I receptor and incorporation of [3H]thymidine into RINm5F cells. Both the IGF-I-induced protein phosphorylation and [3H]thymidine incorporation were abolished in the presence of the tyrosine kinase inhibitor, genistein. Under basal conditions, IGF-I did not induce insulin release or changes in cytosolic free Ca2+ concentration. Immunoprecipitation of proteins from RINm5F cells, using phosphotyrosine antibodies, followed by western blotting using antibody against IRS-1 revealed no distinct band of phosphorylated insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-1. Instead, tyrosine-phosphorylated IRS-2 was detected and stimulated by IGF-I when western blotting was performed using antibody against IRS-2. These results indicate that IRS-1 is not likely to be involved in IGF-I signalling in RINm5F cells. Hence, IGF-I stimulated DNA synthesis in RINm5F cells was associated with phosphorylation of IGF-I receptors and IRS-2.
95	NR	9564850	The insulin receptor, following insulin stimulation of cells, triggers formation of various signaling complexes. In rat HTC hepatoma cells overexpressing normal human insulin receptors (HTC-IR), p85 regulatory subunit of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) forms signaling complexes containing the insulin receptor, insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1), guanosine triphosphatase-activating protein (GAP) and 60-70 kDa phosphotyrosine proteins (p60-70). In the present study, we demonstrate that p60-70 interacts directly with the p85 subunit via src homology 2 domain of the latter. Employing antibodies specific to two p85 isoforms, p85alpha and p85beta, we demonstrate that HTC-IR cells express both p85 isoforms, and these isoforms induce the formation of similar signaling complexes in response to insulin. p60-70, present in both alpha-p85alpha and alpha-p85beta immunoprecipitates, is a GAP-associated protein, but is distinct from the p68 src-associated protein in mitosis (Sam68) by several criteria. These data suggest that 1) GAP-associated protein, but not Sam68, is a part of insulin signaling complexes; and 2) p85alpha and p85beta form similar, but distinct, insulin receptor signaling complexes.
95	NR	9513709	There is increasing evidence for interactions between steroid and growth factor signalling pathways. Oestrogens modulate the responsiveness of breast epithelial cells to insulin-like growth factors (IGFs), and this may be the mechanism by which oestrogens modulate cell proliferation. Oestrogens appear to act at several points in the IGF signal transduction pathway. Despite earlier studies suggesting that breast epithelial cells do not synthesize IGF-I, we have shown by PCR that IGF-I is expressed and that its expression is regulated by oestrogen. IGF-II is expressed at markedly higher levels than IGF-I and is also regulated by oestrogen, consistent with it being an oestrogen-regulated autocrine growth factor. Oestrogens regulate the expression of IGF binding proteins and the type I IGF receptor. The biological significance of oestrogen regulation of IGF binding protein expression is not clear. Experiments in which the type I IGF receptor has been constitutively overexpressed have suggested that oestrogen regulation of the receptor is not involved in mediating the effects of oestrogen on cell proliferation. Recent studies have started to assess the effects of oestrogen on the expression of components of the IGF signal transduction pathway, and have shown that the expression of insulin receptor substrate-1, the principal substrate for the tyrosine kinase of the type I IGF receptor, is regulated by oestradiol.
95	NR	9508089	Insulin and insulinlike growth factors are important for embryonic growth and metabolism. Intracellular transduction for these factors has not been studied in the preimplantation mouse embryo. Peri-implantation mouse embryos synthesize insulinlike growth factor (IGF)-II ligand, insulin receptor, IGF-I receptor, and IGF-II receptor and respond to IGF-II, IGF-I, and insulin metabolically and mitogenically. Maternal tissues in the oviduct and uterus are also sources of IGF-I and insulin. Signaling of IGFs occurs through insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-1 and IRS-2. This paper shows that IRS-1 mRNA and protein are highly expressed in preimplantation mouse embryos, in embryonic cell lines, and in cultured blastocyst outgrowths. IRS-1 mRNA and protein are detected in embryo-derived cell lines cultured to produce the three cell lineages (stem cells, endoderm, and trophoblast cells). IRS-1 mRNA is detected by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in the E3.5 blastocyst before implantation and in F9 teratocarcinoma stem cells and parietal endoderm cells. IRS-1 mRNA is detected by Northern blot hybridization at high levels in stem cells and in differentiated progeny of F9 cells and C3H/NE trophectoderm cells. IRS-1 protein was detected in these cell lines and in an overexpressing CHO-IRS-1 fibroblast cell line by immunocytochemistry. Cultured blastocyst outgrowths are a model for implantation events of the trophoblast/placenta lineage and endoderm/yolk sac lineage. In the blastocyst outgrowth, IRS-1 protein is detected in inner cell mass cells (ICM cells), primitive endoderm, parietal endoderm, and trophectoderm cells. These data suggest that IRS-1 is expressed in all cell lineages of the peri-implantation mouse embryo and mediates some effects of insulin and IGFs at this stage.
95	NR	9489713	The mechanism whereby agonist occupancy of muscarinic cholinergic receptors elicits an increased tyrosine phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and paxillin has been examined. Addition of oxotremorine-M to SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells resulted in rapid increases in the phosphorylation of FAK (t(1/2) = 2 min) and paxillin that were independent of integrin-extracellular matrix interactions, cell attachment, and the production of phosphoinositide-derived second messengers. In contrast, the increased tyrosine phosphorylations of FAK and paxillin were inhibited by inclusion of either cytochalasin D or mevastatin, agents that disrupt the cytoskeleton. Furthermore, phosphorylation of FAK and paxillin could be prevented by addition of either wortmannin or LY-294002, under conditions in which the synthesis of phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate was markedly attenuated. These results indicate that muscarinic receptor-mediated increases in the tyrosine phosphorylation of FAK and paxillin in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells depend on both the maintenance of an actin cytoskeleton and the ability of these cells to synthesize phosphoinositides.
95	NR	9466558	Insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) is a multisite docking protein occupying a central position in signaling cascades stimulated by a number of growth factors including insulin. Using Western blotting and immunohistochemistry, we investigated the expression of IRS-1 in more than 400 preneoplastic foci of altered hepatocytes and in 12 hepatocellular carcinomas induced in rats by oral administration of N-nitrosomorpholine. In both N-nitrosomorpholine-treated and untreated rat livers, IRS-1 was demonstrable by Western blotting, but with the exception of a few single hepatocytes it was not detectable in the normal parenchyma by immunohistochemistry. In contrast, immunohistochemistry revealed that IRS-1 was strongly expressed in the majority of foci of altered hepatocytes particularly in approximately 97% of the clear/acidophilic and mixed cell foci showing excessive storage of glycogen (glycogenosis). In glycogen-poor basophilic foci of altered hepatocytes and hepatocellular carcinomas, IRS-1 was not detected by immunohistochemistry, but a weak expression was observed in small subpopulations of three hepatocellular carcinomas containing remnants of glycogen. These results indicate that the focal overexpression of IRS-1 is an early event in hepatocarcinogenesis, which is closely correlated with preneoplastic hepatic glycogenosis. During progression from glycogenotic foci to hepatocellular carcinomas, IRS-1-overexpression is gradually down-regulated, and this late event is associated with a fundamental metabolic shift leading to the malignant neoplastic phenotype.
95	NR	9415395	Peroxovanadiums (pVs) are potent protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) inhibitors with insulin-mimetic properties in vivo and in vitro. We have established the existence of an insulin receptor kinase (IRK)-associated PTP whose inhibition by pVs correlates closely with IRK tyrosine phosphorylation, activation, and downstream signaling. pVs have also been shown to activate various tyrosine kinases (TKs) that could participate in activation of the insulin-signaling pathway. In the present study we have sought to determine whether pV-induced IRK tyrosine phosphorylation requires the intrinsic kinase activity of the IRK, and whether IRK activation is necessary to realize the early steps in the insulin-signaling cascade. To address this we evaluated the effect of a pure pV compound, bis peroxovanadium 1,10-phenanthroline [bpV(phen)], in HTC rat hepatoma cells overexpressing normal (HTC-IR) or kinase-deficient (HTC-M1030) mutant IRKs. We showed that at a dose of 0.1 mM, but not 1 mM, bpV(phen) induced IRK-dependent events. Thus, 0.1 mM bpV(phen) increased tyrosine phosphorylation and IRK activity in HTC-IR but not HTC-M1030 cells. Tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin signal-transducing molecules was promoted in HTC-IR but not HTC-M1030 cells by bpV(phen). The association of p185 and p60 with the src homology-2 (SH2) domains of Syp and the p85-regulatory subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase was induced by bpV(phen) in HTC-IR, but not in HTC-M1030 cells, as was insulin receptor substrate-1-associated phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase activity. Thus autophosphorylation and activation of the IRK by bpV(phen) is effected by the IRK itself, and the early events in the insulin- signaling cascade follow from this activation event. This establishes a critical role for PTP(s) in the regulation of IRK activity. bpV(phen) could be distinguished from insulin only in its ability to activate ERK1 in HTC-M1030 cells, thus indicating that this event is IRK independent, consistent with our previous hypothesis that bpV(phen) inhibits a PTP involved in the negative regulation of mitogen-activated protein kinases.
95	NR	9388225	Ewing's family of tumors is characterized by a well described reciprocal translocation, t(11;22)(q24;q12), which produces a fusion protein (EWS/FLI-1) that transforms mouse fibroblasts. The EWS/FLI-1 fusion protein has been shown to act as a potent chimeric transcription factor. Overexpression of insulin-like growth factor-I receptor (IGF-IR) has been implicated in many tumor models as playing a role in cell growth and tumorigenesis. In addition, blockade of the IGF-IR inhibits the growth of Ewing's family of tumors cells. Therefore, we first studied whether the presence of the IGF-IR is required for transformation by the EWS/FLI-1 fusion protein. To perform this study, we used two previously described fibroblast cell lines, R- and W, derived from an IGF-IR knockout mouse and a wild-type littermate, respectively. Neither W nor R- cells without the fusion protein formed soft agar colonies. However, W clones expressing the fusion message (WF cells) formed soft agar colonies, whereas R- clones expressing the fusion message (R-F cells) did not form soft agar colonies. Because the IGF-IR is required for EWS/FLI-1 transformation, we chose to investigate whether altered signaling occurs from the IGF-IR when the EWS/FLI-1 fusion is present. WF cells demonstrated a greater degree of ligand-stimulated insulin receptor substrate-1 phosphorylation when compared with W cells, suggesting that expression of the EWS/FLI-1 fusion protein alters the IGF-IR signaling pathway.
95	NR	9408743	It is now clear that PCOS is often associated with profound insulin resistance as well as with defects in insulin secretion. These abnormalities, together with obesity, explain the substantially increased prevalence of glucose intolerance in PCOS. Moreover, since PCOS is an extremely common disorder, PCOS-related insulin resistance is an important cause of NIDDM in women (Table 3). The insulin resistance in at least 50% of PCOS women appears to be related to excessive serine phosphorylation of the insulin receptor. A factor extrinsic to the insulin receptor, presumably a serine/threonine kinase, causes this abnormality and is an example of an important new mechanism for human insulin resistance related to factors controlling insulin receptor signaling. Serine phosphorylation appears to modulate the activity of the key regulatory enzyme of androgen biosynthesis, P450c17. It is thus possible that a single defect produces both the insulin resistance and the hyperandrogenism in some PCOS women (Fig. 19). Recent studies strongly suggest that insulin is acting through its own receptor (rather than the IGF-I receptor) in PCOS to augment not only ovarian and adrenal steroidogenesis but also pituitary LH release. Indeed, the defect in insulin action appears to be selective, affecting glucose metabolism but not cell growth. Since PCOS usually has a menarchal age of onset, this makes it a particularly appropriate disorder in which to examine the ontogeny of defects in carbohydrate metabolism and for ascertaining large three-generation kindreds for positional cloning studies to identify NIDDM genes. Although the presence of lipid abnormalities, dysfibrinolysis, and insulin resistance would be predicted to place PCOS women at high risk for cardiovascular disease, appropriate prospective studies are necessary to directly assess this.
95	NR	9394418	The insulin receptor (IR), a ligand-activated tyrosine kinase, is present in breast cancers, but its relationship to patient survival is unknown. The IR was measured in 584 tumor specimens from patients with node-negative breast carcinoma by frozen-section immunohistochemistry and light microscopy. The immunostaining signal was quantitated in relation to both the staining intensity and the proportion of positive malignant epithelial cells. Analyses indicated that patients with tumors with undetectable IR content in malignant epithelial cells (260 cases) had a relatively lower predicted 5-year disease-free survival (DFS) (69% +/- 3%) than did patients with tumors with detectable IR content (324 cases; DFS 76% +/- 3%, p = .032). The significance of IR content in these breast malignant epithelial cells was then analyzed along with patient age, tumor size, progesterone and estrogen receptor status, p53 accumulation, and S-phase. Multivariate analysis of these data revealed that after adjustment for these other variables, IR content was the strongest independent predictive factor for DFS (relative risk = 1.73, p = .005). Interestingly, in a small subset of patients with very high IR content (n = 62), DFS was decreased. These data indicate that IR content in node-negative breast cancers is a significant major predictor of reduced DFS. Moreover, they raise the possibility that the measurement of IR content might provide important information concerning breast cancer biology.
95	NR	9360986	hGrb10alpha (previously named Grb-IR) is a Src-homology 2 domain-containing protein that binds with high affinity to the tyrosine-phosphorylated insulin receptor and insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor. At least two isoforms of human Grb10, (hGrb10alpha and hGrb10beta), which differ in the pleckstrin homology (PH) domain and the N-terminal sequence, have previously been identified in insulin target tissues such as human skeletal muscle and fat cells. Here we report the cloning of the third isoform of the hGrb10 family (hGrb10gamma) from human skeletal muscle and its localization to human chromosome 7. We have also determined the human chromosome localization of Grb7 to 17q21-q22 and Grb14 to chromosome 2. hGrb10gamma contains an intact PH domain and an N-terminal sequence that is present in hGrb10alpha but absent in hGrb10beta. RNase protection assays and Western blot analysis showed that hGrb10alpha and hGrb10gamma are differentially expressed in insulin target cells including skeletal muscle, liver, and adipocyte cells. hGrb10gamma is also expressed in HeLa cells and various breast cancer cell lines. The protein bound with high affinity to the insulin receptor in cells, and the interaction was dependent on the tyrosine phosphorylation of the receptor. hGrb10gamma also underwent insulin-stimulated membrane translocation and serine phosphorylation. hGrb10gamma phosphorylation was inhibited by PD98059, a specific inhibitor of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase, and wortmannin, a specific inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. Taken together, our data suggest that hGrb10 isoforms are potential downstream signaling components of the insulin receptor tyrosine kinase and that the PH domain may play an important role in the involvement of these isoforms in signal transduction pathways initiated by insulin and other growth factors.
95	NR	9326223	Binding of interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha) to its receptor on hematopoietic cells activates the signal transducers and activators of transcription (Stat)- and insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-pathways, and regulates expression of antiproliferative and antiviral activities. However, it remains unknown whether these two pathways cooperate in the generation of IFN-alpha responses or function independently, and whether IRS-proteins transduce distinct downstream signals in response to IFNs or insulin/insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1-mediated activation. Our data show that in response to IFN-alpha treatment, IRS-1 functions selectively as a docking protein for the SH2 domains of the p85 subunit of the PI 3'-kinase, but not the SH2 domain of Grb-2 which is engaged during insulin/IGF-1 signaling. In studies with THP-1 human myelomonocytic cells and 32D mouse myeloid cells, which are IRS-defective, we found that the IFN-alpha-regulated activation of Stat-1, Stat-2, and Stat-3 does not require the function of the IRS-system. Furthermore, THP-1 cells are responsive to the protective effect of IFN-alpha against vesicular stomatitis virus. Both 32D and THP-1 cells were resistant to the growth inhibitory effect of IFN-alpha, but this effect was not reversible by expression of IRS-1 or IRS-2 alone in 32D cells. Taken altogether these data show that: (1) The IRS-system transduces common and distinct signals in response to IFN-alpha or insulin/lGF-1 stimulation of hematopoietic cells. (2) The IRS-pathway operates separately from the Stat-pathway, and its function is not essential for the generation of the antiviral effect of IFN-alpha. (3) Neither the IRS- nor the Stat-pathways alone are sufficient to mediate the antiproliferative effects of IFN-alpha in hematopoietic cells, and additional signaling elements are required.
95	NR	9312019	Integrin-mediated cell attachment modulates growth responses and growth factors regulate cell attachment. Moreover, both cell attachment to extracellular matrix and mitogenic signaling by growth factors are necessary for the proliferation of most types of normal cells, suggesting that integrin and growth factor receptor signaling pathways meet at some downstream point. We report here that a small, highly tyrosine-phosphorylated fraction of PDGFbeta and insulin receptors co-immunoprecipitates with the alphavbeta3 integrin from cells. The integrin association requires growth factor stimulation of the receptors. Several signaling molecules that are known to be associated with activated growth factor receptors were present in the alphavbeta3 integrin complexes. Mitogenicity and chemotaxis induced by PDGF-BB were enhanced in cells plated on the alphavbeta3 ligand vitronectin compared with cells plated on the beta1 integrin ligand collagen. Thus, the engagement of the alphavbeta3 integrin in cell-matrix interactions appears to coordinate an intense response to growth factors, helping to explain the importance of this integrin for tissue regeneration, angiogenesis and tumor metastasis.
95	NR	9303488	The human insulin receptor substrate-1 (hIRS-1) is a key intracellular protein involved in various cytokine signaling pathways associated with cell growth. We have previously demonstrated that stable transfection and overexpression of hIRS-1 in human hepatoblastoma cells in vitro leads to the constitutive activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade. In this setting, hIRS-1 acts as a dominant oncogene and will induce neoplastic transformation of NIH 3T3 cells. In the present study, the biologic effects of hIRS-1 overexpression in the liver was analyzed using both clinical tumor samples and a newly developed transgenic mouse model. We have found that approximately 40% of 22 human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tumors had enhanced (>200%) hIRS-1 gene expression compared with adjacent non-involved liver tissue. There was a significant relationship between the level of hIRS-1 overexpression and the tumor size; this finding suggests a possible role for hIRS-1 in tumor progression. To determine if downstream signal transduction cascades were activated by overexpression of hIRS-1 in hepatocytes, we established a transgenic mouse model using an hIRS-1 construct driven by an albumin promoter/enhancer element to direct liver specific expression. The overexpressed hIRS-1 protein was found to be tyrosyl phosphorylated and interacted with downstream SH2-containing molecules such as the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K), Grb2 adaptor, and SHP2 phosphatase proteins. The functional consequences of hIRS-1 overexpression were reflected by constitutive activation of both the MAPK and PI3K signal transduction cascades. More important, overexpression of hIRS-1 in the transgenic liver led to increased hepatocyte DNA synthesis. Our findings indicate that hIRS-1 overexpression induces downstream signaling molecules associated with hepatocyte growth and may potentially enhance tumor progression of HCC.
95	NR	9311601	Several polypeptide growth factors stimulate breast cancer growth and may be involved in tumor progression. However, the relative importance of diverse growth factor signaling pathways in the development and maintenance of the neoplastic phenotype is largely unknown. The activation of such growth factor receptors as the insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGF-I R), erbB-type receptors (erbB Rs) and FGF receptors (FGF Rs) controls the phenotype of a model breast cancer cell line MCF-7. To evaluate the function of 2 post-receptor signaling molecules, insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) (a major substrate of the IGF-IR) and SHC (a common substrate of tyrosine kinase receptors), we developed several MCF-7-derived cell clones in which the synthesis of either IRS-1 or SHC was blocked by antisense RNA. In MCF-7 cells, down-regulation of IRS-1 by 80-85% strongly suppressed anchorage-dependent and -independent growth and induced apoptotic cell death under growth factor- and estrogen-reduced conditions. The reduction of SHC levels by approximately 50% resulted in the inhibition of monolayer and anchorage-independent growth but did not decrease cell survival. Importantly, cell aggregation and the ability of cells to survive on the extracellular matrix were inhibited in MCF-7/anti-SHC clones, but not in MCF-7/anti-IRS-1 clones. Cell motility toward IGF was not attenuated in any of the tested cell lines, but motility toward EGF was decreased in MCF-7/anti-SHC clones. Our results suggest that in MCF-7 cells: 1) both IRS-1 and SHC are implicated in the control of monolayer and anchorage-independent growth; 2) IRS-1 is critical to support cell survival; 3) SHC is involved in EGF-dependent motility; and 4) normal levels of SHC, but not IRS-1, are necessary for the formation and maintenance of cell-cell interactions.
95	NR	9245714	Glycine-extended gastrin precursors (G-Gly) were considered as processing intermediates devoid of biological activity. However, we have recently identified selective receptors for G-Gly which mediate the proliferative effects of this precursor. Little is known about the signaling pathways activated by G-Gly. In the present study, we demonstrate that PI-3-kinase is rapidly and transiently activated by G-Gly. We also observed a rapid increase in the tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1 and an activation of the PI-3-kinase in anti-IRS-1 immunoprecipitates, suggesting that PI-3-kinase may be activated by association with tyrosine phosphorylated IRS-1. We also demonstrated that gastrin precursors activate the serine/threonine kinase, p70 kDa S6 kinase (p70S6K), through a wortmannin sensitive pathway.
95	NR	9248698	Insulin has traditionally been considered as a hormone essential for metabolic regulation, while the insulin-like growth factors (IGF-I and IGF-II) are postulated to be more specifically involved in growth regulation. The conventional wisdom is that they share each other's effects only at high concentrations, due to their weak affinity for the heterologous receptor. We discuss here the evidence that in the proper cellular context, insulin can be mitogenic at physiologic concentrations through its own receptor. We studied the insulin and IGF-I binding characteristics of a new model suitable for analysing insulin receptor mediated mitogenesis; that is, a T-cell lymphoma line that depends on insulin for growth, but is unresponsive to IGFs. The cells showed no specific binding of 125I-IGF-I and furthermore, no IGF-I receptor mRNA was detected by RNAse protection assay in the LB cells, in contrast with mouse brain and thymus. The cells bound at saturation about 3000 insulin molecules to receptors that had normal characteristics in terms of affinity, kinetics, pH dependence and negative co-operativity. A series of insulin analogues competed for 125I-insulin binding with relative potencies comparable to those observed in other insulin target cells. The full sequence of the insulin receptor cDNA was determined and found to be identical to the published sequence of the murine insulin receptor cDNA. The LB cell line is therefore an ideal model with which to investigate insulin mitogenic signalling without interference from the IGF-I receptor. Using this model, we have started approaching the molecular basis of insulin-induced mitogenesis, in particular the role of signalling kinetics in choosing between mitogenic and metabolic pathways.
95	NR	9202243	We investigated cellular proliferation, the transforming activity, and activation of known signal transduction pathways in NIH-3T3 cells stably expressing insulin-like growth factor-I receptors (IGF-IRs) with amino acid substitutions in the carboxy(C)-terminal domain. The mutant receptors contained substitutions of both tyrosines 1250 and 1251 with phenylalanine and histidine (amino acids present in the analogous positions in the insulin receptor), as well as phenylalanine 1310 replaced by tyrosine (IsY clones) to resemble the placement of tyrosine residues in the C-terminal domain of the insulin receptor. As a control for the IsY clones, a second mutant receptor was expressed with a substitution of phenylalanine 1310 with tyrosine only (DBY clones). Clones expressing IGF-IRs with the IsY substitutions had a significantly slower rate of growth compared with cells expressing an equivalent number of wild-type IGF-IRs (NWT). In contrast, the DBY clones showed relatively normal growth rates. Cells with wild-type IGF-IR demonstrated a transformed phenotype in soft agar assays. The IsY clones lost the transforming ability of the wild type IGF-IR, whereas DBY clones formed colonies. IGF-I-stimulated autophosphorylation of the IGF-IR and tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1 and SHC, known substrates in the IGF-IR signal transduction pathway, were studied. Mutated IGF-IRs (IsY and DBY) did not alter the IGF-I-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of these proteins. Furthermore, the mutated IGF-IRs did not alter Grb2 association with phosphorylated IRS-1 and SHC. IGF-I stimulation of Crk-II phosphorylation, a novel substrate of the IGF-IR, was similar in cells expressing mutated and wild-type IGF-IRs. IGF-I-induced activation of phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3'-kinase was equivalent in cells expressing either mutant or wild-type IGF-IRs. These data suggest that the IGF-IR mediates, at least in part, cellular proliferation and increased transforming ability through its C-terminal domain. The exact postreceptor signaling pathway(s) involved have yet to be fully elucidated.
95	NR	9199308	R- cells, a line of mouse embryo fibroblasts with a targeted disruption of the insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) receptor genes, are refractory to transformation by several viral and cellular oncogenes. Using colony formation in soft agar as a measure of full transformation, we report here that R- cells can be transformed by v-src, although they still cannot be transformed by the activated c-src527 (mutation at tyrosine 527 to phenylalanine), which readily transforms mouse embryo cells with a wild-type number of IGF-I receptors (W cells). Although v-src is a more potent inducer of tyrosine phosphorylation than c-src527, the extent of phosphorylation of either insulin receptor substrate 1 or Shc, two of the major substrates of the IGF-I receptor, does not seem sufficiently different to explain the qualitative difference in soft agar growth. v-src, however, is considerably more efficient than c-src527 in its ability to tyrosyl phosphorylate, in R- cells, the focal adhesion kinase, Stat1, and p130cas. These results indicate that v-src, but not c-src527, can bypass the requirement for a functional IGF-I receptor in the full transformation of mouse embryo fibroblasts and suggest that qualitative and quantitative differences between the two oncogenes can be used to identify some of the signals relevant to the mechanism(s) of transformation.
95	NR	9207225	Transmembrane protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPases) may act as regulators of the insulin receptor. Supporting this hypothesis, antisense suppression of the PTPase LAR in McA-RH7777 hepatoma cells increased insulin receptor signaling (Kulas et. al., J. Biol. Chem. (1996) 271, 748-754). The effects of decreased LAR expression may be mediated by decreased dephosphorylation of the insulin receptor. The rate of insulin receptor dephosphorylation was examined in situ, following elution of surface bound insulin at pH 4.0. In LAR antisense cells, dephosphorylation was prolonged by 2.6-fold with a t(1/2) of 87+/-11 sec compared to a t(1/2) of 34+/-6 sec in control cells. EGF receptor dephosphorylation was also prolonged in LAR antisense cells. These results are further evidence that LAR is a physiological regulator of the insulin receptor and is consistent with its direct interaction with the tyrosine phosphorylated insulin receptor.
95	NR	9199189	STAT proteins are important transcription factors that regulate cell growth and differentiation. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms of insulin actions, we have studied how insulin activates STAT proteins in Hep3B cells. Insulin rapidly phosphorylated Stat1alpha at tyrosine residues and increased its specific binding activities to a GAS/ISRE consensus oligonucleotide. IL-4 also phosphorylated Stat1alpha and increased DNA binding activities to the same Stat1alpha responsive element. There was no increase in tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK family of kinases following insulin stimulation. In contrast, IL-4 stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK1, JAK2 and tyk2 in this cell line. These data indicate that insulin receptor signaling can activate the transcriptional regulatory function of STAT protein, and that insulin actions on Stat1alpha are mediated through signaling pathways independent of JAK family of kinases.
95	NR	9166754	Glycosyltransferase gene transfection into cell lines has been an approach used successfully to elucidate the functional role of cell surface glycoconjugates. We have transfected the rat CMP-NeuAc:Galbeta1,4GlcNAc alpha2,6-sialyltransferase (EC 2.4.99.1) gene into a human, tumorigenic, glioma cell line, U373 MG. This transfection led to a marked inhibition of invasivity, alterations in adhesivity to fibronectin and collagen matrices, and inappropriately sialylated alpha3beta1 integrin. Adhesion-mediated protein tyrosine phosphorylation was reduced in the transfectants despite increased expression of focal adhesion kinase, p125fak. Furthermore, the transfectants showed a distinct cell morphology, an increased number of focal adhesion sites, and different sensitivity to cytochalasin D treatment than control U373 MG cells. These results suggest that inappropriate sialylation of cell surface glycoconjugates, such as integrins, can change focal adhesion as well as adhesion-mediated signal transduction and block glioma cell invasivity in vitro.
95	NR	9139660	A new class of protein tyrosine kinase inhibitors was identified that is based on an oxindole core (indolinones). Two compounds from this class inhibited the kinase activity of fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) and showed differential specificity toward other receptor tyrosine kinases. Crystal structures of the tyrosine kinase domain of FGFR1 in complex with the two compounds were determined. The oxindole occupies the site in which the adenine of adenosine triphosphate binds, whereas the moieties that extend from the oxindole contact residues in the hinge region between the two kinase lobes. The more specific inhibitor of FGFR1 induces a conformational change in the nucleotide-binding loop. This structural information will facilitate the design of new inhibitors for use in the treatment of cancer and other diseases in which cell signaling by tyrosine kinases plays a crucial role in disease pathogenesis.
95	NR	9112401	To assess the autocrine function of insulin-like growth factor II (IGF-II) in the balance of proliferation and differentiation in HT29-D4 human colonic cancer cells, we studied the expression of IGF-I receptors (IGF-IR) and insulin receptors (IR) in relation to the state of cell differentiation. IGF-IR and IR were expressed in both undifferentiated and enterocyte-like differentiated HT29-D4 cells. IGF-IR had two isoforms with a 97-kDa and a 102-kDa beta-subunit. In addition, HT29-D4 cells expressed hybrid receptors (HR) formed by the association of two alphabeta heterodimers from both IR and IGF-IR. HR were evidenced through 1) inhibition of IGF-I binding by the B6 anti-IR antibody and 2) immunoprecipitation with the alpha-IR3 anti-IGF-IR antibody, which revealed an additional 95-kDa IR beta-subunit that disappeared when the heterotetrameric receptor was dissociated by disulfide reduction into alphabeta heterodimers before immunoprecipitation. Like IGF-IR, HR had a high affinity for IGF-I (Kd, approximately 1.5 nM), but did not bind insulin significantly; the latter interacted with the native IR only (Kd, approximately 4 nM). In the differentiated HT29-D4 cell monolayer, all receptor species were strongly polarized (>97%) toward the basolateral membrane. Moreover, HT29-D4 cell differentiation was accompanied by an approximately 2-fold increase in the number of IR, whereas the number of IGF-I-binding sites was unaltered. However, in differentiated HT29-D4 cells, approximately 55% of the latter were involved in HR vs. approximately 20% in undifferentiated HT29-D4 cells. Thus, HT29-D4 cell differentiation is characterized by an up-regulation (approximately 3-fold) of the level of HR coupled to a down-regulation (approximately 40%) of the level of native tetrameric IGF-IR. Alterations were induced early during the cell differentiation process, i.e. 5 days postconfluence, and remained unchanged for at least 21 days. Taken together, these results suggest that the IGF-II autocrine loop in HT29-D4 cells may trigger distinct signaling pathways if it activates native IGF-IR, which predominate in undifferentiated cells, or if it activates HR, which are up-regulated in differentiated cells.
95	NR	9056422	The insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGF-IR) paracrine or autocrine loop plays an important role in the maintenance of breast cancer growth. Cancer cells contain several-fold higher levels of the IGF-IR than normal breast tissue; however, it is still not clear whether abnormally high activation of IGF-IR signaling may induce progression of the disease. To address this question, we have established several MCF-7-derived clones (MCF-7/IGF-IR cells) overexpressing the IGF-IR. We report here that overexpression of the IGF-IR did not modify sensitivity of cells to IGF-I; however, responsiveness to the ligand was moderately enhanced in most of the MCF-7/IGF-IR clones (measured by [3H]thymidine incorporation into DNA). All MCF-7/IGF-IR clones responded to the synergistic action of 1 nM estradiol (E2) and small amounts of IGF-I (up to 0.8 ng/ml). Exposure of cells to higher concentrations of IGF-I abolished estrogen requirements for stimulation of DNA synthesis in all MCF-7/IGF-IR clones, but not in the parental cells. The most important finding of this work was that the amplification of the IGF-IR induced cell-cell adhesion in MCF-7 cells. High levels of the IGF-IR promoted cell aggregation on Matrigel, allowed proliferation of cells within the aggregates, and protected clustered cells from death. In both MCF-7 and MCF-7/IGF-IR cells, IGF-I stimulated aggregation, whereas an anti-E cadherin antibody blocked cell-cell adhesion. Furthermore, immunofluorescence staining with specific antibodies revealed co-localization of the IGF-IR and E-cadherin at the points of cell-cell contacts. Moreover, the IGF-IR and its two substrates, insulin receptor substrate 1 and SHC, were contained within the E-cadherin complexes. Our results suggest that overexpressed IGF-IRs, by promoting the aggregation, growth, and survival of breast cancer cells, may accelerate the increase of tumor mass and may also prevent cell scattering.
95	NR	9013940	It has been shown that IL-4 induces the tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK1 and JAK3 in the majority of hemopoietic cell types, and JAK2 and TYK2 in several other types. However, the significance of this tyrosine phosphorylation in regulating IL-4 signaling has not been shown. To determine whether JAKs play a role in activating a signal transduction pathway different from the classical JAK/STAT pathway, we analyzed the ability of huIL-4 to stimulate the tyrosine phosphorylation of one of its major cellular substrates, the insulin receptor substrate (IRS). Using human fibrosarcoma cell lines with mutations in JAK1, JAK2, and TYK2, we found that expression of functional JAK1, but not TYK2 or JAK2, is essential for IL-4-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS. We also provide evidence that the IRS pathway is independent of STAT-6, showing that JAK1 is essential for activating a STAT-independent pathway.
95	NR	9009165	We have reported that human ovarian-carcinoma cell lines express high-affinity IL-4 receptor. Since IL-4R has been hypothesized to share a chain with IL-13R, we investigated whether ovarian cancer cells express IL-13 receptor. In the present study, we report that the ovarian-carcinoma cell lines IGROV-1 and PA-1 express varying numbers of high-affinity IL-13 receptors. Furthermore, IL-13 inhibited the binding of IL-4 on both ovarian-carcinoma cell lines, while IL-4 did not inhibit IL-13 binding on IGROV-1 cell line. IL-13 and IL-4 induced the phosphorylation of JAK1, JAK2 and Tyk2 Janus kinases in PA-1 cells. In contrast, JAK3 tyrosine kinase was expressed in PA-1 cells, but IL-4 or IL-13 did not augment its phosphorylation. In IGROV-1 cells, Tyk2 was constitutively phosphorylated and this phosphorylation was augmented by IL-4 or IL-13. JAK1 and JAK2 but not JAK3 were expressed but only JAK2 was faintly phosphorylated in response to either IL-13 or IL-4 respectively. IRS (insulin-receptor substrate)-1 and IRS-2 were also phosphorylated constitutively in both ovarian cancer cell lines examined, but only the phosphorylation of IRS-1 was augmented in response to IL-4 or IL-13. STAT6 was phosphorylated and activated in response to IL-4 and IL-13 in all cell lines examined. Our results demonstrate that ovarian cancer cell lines may express 2 types of IL-13R and the IL-13- or IL-4-induced signaling patterns may be slightly different in each type of receptor.
95	NR	9015186	Interleukin 4 (IL-4) and Interleukin 13 (IL-13) have been shown to have numerous similar effects on human B cells; however, the mechanism of signal transduction is not known. We have examined IL-4- and IL-13-induced signal transduction in Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-immortalized B cells. We demonstrate that Janus kinase 3 (JAK3) and Tyk2 but not JAK1 and JAK2 tyrosine kinases were constitutively phosphorylated in three EBV B cell lines. The phosphorylation level of Tyk2 was augmented at a low level in response to IL-13 and IL-4 in two of three cell lines; however, IL-13 did not induce or augment phosphorylation of the other JAK kinases. On the other hand, IL-4 further augmented phosphorylation of JAK3 and induced the phosphorylation of JAK1 kinases. IL-4 receptor p140 protein was also constitutively phosphorylated in two of three EBV B cell lines examined and both IL-4 and IL-13 further augmented its phosphorylation. Insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-1 or IRS-2 proteins were not constitutively phosphorylated nor did IL-13 and IL-4 induce phosphorylation of these proteins. In contrast to JAKs, IL-4-specific signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT6) was not constitutively phosphorylated or activated in these cell lines, but both IL-4 and IL-13 induced their phosphorylation and activation. These findings suggest that in EBV-immortalized B cells JAK3 and Tyk2 proteins were constitutively phosphorylated but STAT6 protein was not constitutively phosphorylated. In addition, despite major similarities in biological effects between IL-4 and IL-13, phosphorylation patterns of JAK kinases in response to IL-13 in EBV-immortalized B cells appear to be different from those of IL-4.
95	NR	8995240	The avian sarcoma virus UR2 codes for an oncogenic Gag-Ros fusion protein-tyrosine kinase (PTK). We have previously derived two retroviruses, T6 and NM1, coding for oncogenic Gag-insulin receptor and Gag-insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGFR) fusion proteins, respectively. The Gag-IGFR fusion protein dimerizes, whereas Gag-Ros does not. To identify sequences affecting dimerization and the effect of dimerization on signaling and biological functions, we generated recombinants exchanging the extracellular and transmembrane sequences among the three fusion receptors. The presence of multiple cysteines in the Gag sequence appears to preclude dimerization, since deletion of the 3' cysteine residue allows for dimerization. Most of the chimeric receptors retain high PTK activity and induce transformation regardless of their configuration on the cell surface. UT, a UR2/T6 chimera, retained mitogenic activity but has a markedly reduced transforming ability, while UN7, a UR2/NM1 recombinant, which also harbors Y950F and F951S mutations in IGFR, exhibits dramatic reductions in both activities. All of the fusion receptors can phosphorylate insulin receptor substrate 1 and activate PI 3-kinase. UT protein induces Shc phosphorylation, whereas UN7 protein does not, but both are unable to activate mitogen-activated protein kinase. Our results show that overexpressed oncogenic Gag-fusion receptors do not require dimerization for their signaling and transforming functions and that the extracellular and transmembrane sequences of a receptor PTK can affect its specific substrate interactions.
95	NR	9015760	Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) can modulate the signalling capacity of tyrosine kinase receptors; in particular, TNF-alpha has been shown to mediate the insulin resistance associated with animal models of obesity and noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. In order to determine whether the effects of TNF-alpha might involve alterations in the expression of specific protein-tyrosine phosphatases (PTPases) that have been implicated in the regulation of growth factor receptor signalling, KRC-7 rat hepatoma cells were treated with TNF-alpha, and changes in overall tissue PTPase activity and the abundance of three major hepatic PTPases (LAR, PTP1B, and SH-PTP2) were measured in addition to effects of TNF-alpha on ligand-stimulated autophosphorylation of insulin and epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptors and insulin-stimulated insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) phosphorylation. TNF-alpha caused a dose-dependent decrease in insulin-stimulated IRS-1 phosphorylation and EGF-stimulated receptor autophosphorylation to 47-50% of control. Overall PTPase activity in the cytosol fraction did not change with TNF-alpha treatment, and PTPase activity in the particulate fraction was decreased by 55-66%, demonstrating that increases in total cellular PTPase activity did not account for the observed alterations in receptor signalling. However, immunoblot analysis showed that TNF-alpha treatment resulted in a 2.5-fold increase in the abundance of SH-PTP2, a 49% decrease in the transmembrane PTPase LAR, and no evident change in the expression of PTP1B. These data suggest that at least part of the TNF-alpha effect on pathways of reversible tyrosine phosphorylation may be exerted through the dynamic modulation of the expression of specific PTPases. Since SH-PTP2 has been shown to interact directly with both the EGF receptor and IRS-1, increased abundance of this PTPase, may mediate the TNF-alpha effect to inhibit signalling through these proteins. Furthermore, decreased abundance of the LAR PTPase, which has been implicated in the regulation of insulin receptor phosphorylation, may account for the less marked effect of TNF-alpha on the autophosphorylation state of the insulin receptor while postreceptor actions of insulin are inhibited.
95	NR	9014838	Estrogen and IGF-I are potent mitogens for most breast cancer cell lines, and although their signaling pathways contrast, there is considerable interaction between them. Recent evidence indicating that IGF-I can alter estrogen receptor (ER) action led us to investigate whether an inhibitor of IGF-I action. IGF-binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1), could affect transcriptional activation of ER. First, we confirmed that tamoxifen (TAM) could inhibit IGF-I-mediated proliferation of MCF-7 cells. Although TAM can increase IGFBP-3 expression in MCF-7 cells, and this binding protein has been shown to be able to inhibit IGF action, TAM had no effect on IGF-I-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of IGF-I receptor or the downstream signaling molecule, insulin receptor substrate-1. Therefore, to confirm that IGF-I was affecting transcriptional activation of ER, we utilized a gene reporter assay using a single consensus estrogen response element (ERE-tk-luc) upstream of luciferase. As expected, estradiol (E2; 1nM) increased transcriptional activation three- to fivefold from the ERE in three ER-positive breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7, ZR-75 and T47D). A 2.5-to 4-fold increase was also seen with IGF-I (5 nM). TAM (1 microM) effectively blocked activation by E2 and IGF-I, indicating disruption of ER-mediated transcription. As expected, human recombinant IGFBP-1 (80 nM) completely inhibited IGF-I-mediated activation of ER, however, IGFBP-1 also caused a significant decrease in E2-mediated activation. We also noticed that IGF-I increased the activity of all plasmids that we cotransfected including TATA-luc, SV40-luc and pGL Basic. This effect was post-transcriptional, as it was not affected by actinomycin D (2 micrograms/ml), while we were able to completely inhibit E2-mediated transcriptional activation of ERE-tk-luc. Unlike the complete inhibition of ER-mediated transcriptional activation by actinomycin D, IGF-I-mediated transactivation was reduced by only 50%, indicating that the activation by IGF-I represented both transcriptional and post-transcriptional effects. This study confirmed that IGF-I can cause transcriptional activation of endogenous ER in human breast cancel cells, and inhibition of ER action by IGFBP-1 suggests that IGF-1 signaling may be necessary for maximal ER activation.
95	NR	8943287	Insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) is involved in insulin signal transduction distal to receptor occupation. Targeted disruption of IRS-1 leads to insulin resistance and hyperglycemia in mice, which suggests that altered IRS-1 expression could contribute to the insulin resistance seen in non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. In vitro studies using phorbol esters have implicated the protein kinase C (PKC) pathway as being involved in the pathogenesis of insulin resistance. Using the MCF-7 breast cancer cell, a role for PKC in regulating IRS-1 expression was examined. In an MCF-7 cell line (MCF-7-PKC-alpha) that exhibits multiple alterations in PKC isoform expression, IRS-1 content was reduced to negligible levels relative to parental MCF-7 cells. This decrease in IRS-1 content was associated with a 30-fold reduction in IRS-1 transcription. In parental MCF-7 cells, PKC inhibitors (GF109203X (bisindolylmaleimide I) and staurosporine) reduced IRS-1 content. Chronic exposure to 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA; >8 h) reduced IRS-1 content and down-regulated the novel PKC-delta isoform. Bryostatin 1 inhibited TPA-induced depletion of both IRS-1 and PKC-delta expression in MCF-7 cells. Associated with TPA-induced reduction in IRS-1 content was a reduction in IRS-1 transcription. These data demonstrate that PKC can modulate IRS-1 content and suggest a potential role for PKC-delta in positively regulating IRS-1 expression.
95	NR	9222417	Colon carcinoma is the most common tumor of the gastrointestinal tract. According to some investigators, insulin, epidermal growth factor (EGF) and insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) man be involved in the neoplastic proliferation. Insulin-binding and receptor tyrosine kinase activity were investigated in colon carcinomas and in normal colons. The insulin receptor concentration, as shown by binding assays, was 17.4 +/- 4.3 fmol/micrograms in normal colon and 29.69 +/- 9.4 fmol/micrograms in colon carcinoma. Nevertheless, the insulin affinity of the receptor was similar in both groups (Kd identical to 1 nM). Both normal and neoplastic colon showed phosphorylation of the insulin receptor. The electrophoretic migration of the beta-subunit of the insulin receptors purified from colon carcinomas was similar to that of normal colon and both tissues demonstrated an insulin-dependent autophosphorylation. The receptor tyrosine kinase activity was measured by the incorporation of [gamma 32P]ATP into the beta-subunit. The basal and the insulin-stimulated tyrosine kinase activities were significantly higher in colon carcinomas compared to normal colon tissues (2.2 and 1.6 times, respectively). Understanding the metabolism of neoplastic cells may contribute to the development of prevention strategies as well as new therapies. It is now necessary to study other steps of the insulin signal transduction pathway, such as insulin receptor substrate 1 phosphorylation.
95	NR	9023010	Protein-tyrosine phosphatases (PTPases) play an essential role in the regulation of reversible tyrosine phosphorylation of cellular proteins that mediate insulin action. In order to explore the potential role of the transmembrane PTPase (LAR) in insulin receptor signal transduction, we overexpressed the full-length LAR protein in McA-RH7777 rat hepatoma cells and found that modest increases in the abundance of LAR protein expression downregulated a number of insulin-stimulated cellular responses closely related to the activation of the receptor kinase. An increase in LAR protein of 2.4-fold over the level in control cells caused a 40% reduction in insulin receptor autophosphorylation in intact cells, without an alteration in insulin receptor mass or a change in the insulin-stimulated receptor kinase activity measured with partially purified receptors in vitro. In addition, insulin-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of the endogenous insulin receptor substrates IRS-1 and Shc were decreased to 57% and 73% of control, respectively, and IRS-1 associated phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase activity was reduced to 47% of control of the cells overexpressing LAR. The present results, taken with our recent data demonstrating that reducing the abundance of LAR by expression of antisense mRNA enhances insulin receptor signal transduction (Kulas D. T., et al. J. Biol. Chem. 270:2435, 1995), supports the hypothesis that LAR acts as a physiological modulator of insulin action in insulin-sensitive hepatoma cells.
95	NR	8903330	Insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1), a substrate of various receptor tyrosine kinases transmits mitogenic signals initiated by extracellular ligands. This protein is involved in normal hepatocyte growth and has been found to be overexpressed in human hepatocellular carcinoma. Expression of a carboxy-terminal truncated IRS-1 molecule containing the pleckstrin homology and phosphotyrosine-binding domains associates with the insulin receptor and prevents tyrosyl phosphorylation of endogenous IRS-1 and Shc proteins. Thus, subsequent activation of downstream signaling molecules induced by insulin and IGF-1 such as phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase and mitogen activated protein kinase is inhibited. The morphologic features of transformed human hepatocellular carcinoma cells change to a differentiated hepatocyte appearance and characteristics of the malignant phenotype as manifested by anchorage independent cell growth and tumor formation in nude mice are lost. These studies demonstrate that signal transduction pathways mediated through or by IRS-1 are important in hepatocyte and human hepatocellular carcinoma cell growth.
95	NR	8831561	IMR32, a neuroblastoma cell line, and CADO LC6, a small cell lung cancer (SCLC) cell line, extended neurite-like processes when cultured on fibronectin (FN)-coated surfaces or cultured in a serum-free medium. Monoclonal antibodies against the integrin beta 1 subunit inhibited this process formation, suggesting that their morphological change is initiated by beta 1 integrin-dependent signal transduction to the cell interior. Anti-phosphorylation level of a 100-kDa protein, but not 125-kDa focal adhesion kindase, correlated well with the morphological change in both cell lines. This 100-kDa protein phosphorylation did not accompany FN-induced morphological changes in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts or A549 adenocarcinoma cells. These findings suggest that neuroblastoma and SCLC may share beta 1 integrin-mediated signaling events distinct from nonneuronal cells.
95	NR	8809056	The physiological role of the beta-cell insulin receptor is unknown. To evaluate a candidate function, the insulin regulation of fluid-phase pinocytosis was investigated in a clonal insulinoma cell line (beta TC6-F7) and, for comparison, also in Chinese hamster ovary cells transfected with the human insulin receptor (CHO-T cells). In CHO-T cells, the net rate of fluid-phase pinocytosis was rapidly increased 3-4-fold over the basal rate by 100 nM insulin, with half-maximal stimulation at 2 nM insulin, as assayed by cellular uptake of horseradish peroxidase from the medium. Wortmannin, an inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol (PI)-3-kinase, blocked insulin-stimulated pinocytosis with an IC50 of 7.5 nM without affecting the basal rate of pinocytosis. In insulin-secreting beta TC6-F7 cells, the secretagogues glucose and carbachol (at maximally effective concentrations of 15 mM and 0.5 mM respectively) augmented fluid-phase pinocytosis 1.65-fold over the basal rate. Wortmannin also inhibited secretagogue-stimulated pinocytosis in these beta-cells with an IC50 of 7 nM but did not affect the basal rate of pinocytosis measured in the absence of secretagogues. Wortmannin did not influence either basal or secretagogue-induced insulin secretion. Although these beta TC6-F7 cells have cell-surface insulin receptors, adding exogenous insulin or insulin-like growth factor 1 did not affect their rate of fluid-phase pinocytosis, either in the absence or presence of secretagogues. From these observations, we conclude that: (1) in both insulin-secreting beta-cells and in conventional, insulin-responsive CHO-T cells, a common, wortmannin-sensitive reaction, which probably involves PI-3-kinase, regulates fluid-phase pinocytosis; (2) the insulin-receptor signal transduction pathway is dissociated from the regulation of fluid-phase pinocytosis in the insulin-secreting beta-cell line we studied; and (3) the enhancement of fluid-phase pinocytosis associated with secretagogue-induced insulin release in beta TC6-F7 cells is not attributable to autocrine activation of beta-cell surface insulin receptors.
95	NR	8758899	Insulin-like growth factors initiate tyrosyl phosphorylation of the insulin receptor substrate I (IRS-I) protein and activate multiple signaling pathways essential for liver growth. This gene has been found to be up-regulated in human hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs), and overexpression of IRS-1 in NIH 3T3 cells leads to malignant transformation with activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade. To explore another possible role of IRS-I in hepatocarcinogenesis, we examined the capability of transforming growth factor beta1 (TGF-beta1), a known negative regulator of hepatocyte growth, to induce programmed cell death in the context of IRS-I overexpression. Hep3B HCC cells were stably transfected with a retroviral vector containing the IRS-I gene. The overexpressed IRS-I protein was highly tyrosyl phosphorylated following insulin/insulin- like growth factor I stimulation and led to constitutive activation of downstream signal transduction molecules such as phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase and mitogen-activated protein kinase. Although parental Hep3B cells were sensitive to apoptosis, the Hep3B-IRS-I-transfected cells acquired resistance to TGF-beta1-induced programmed cell death. Our investigations suggest that IRS-I-mediated signals may act as survival factors and protect against TGF-beta1-induced apoptosis in HCC; this phenomenon may contribute to hepatic oncogenesis.
95	NR	8713057	Thrombin and insulin receptor signaling via phosphoinositide (PI)-specific phospholipase C (PLC) and PI 3-kinase was studied in [3H]inositol-labelled 1321N1 cells. Thrombin stimulated a dramatic, transient activation of PLC which is probably mediated via receptors of the 'tethered-ligand' type, since it was both reproduced by, and abolished following, pretreatment of cells with a synthetic peptide (SFLLRN) corresponding to the ligand domain of the human thrombin receptor. However, neither thrombin nor SFLLRN stimulated PI 3-kinase. By contrast, insulin did not influence [3H]InsP3 concentration but stimulated accumulation of [3H]PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 and [3H]PtdIns(3,4)P2, the relative steady-state concentrations of which may indicate degradation of [3H]PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 by 5- and 3-phosphatases. The independent coupling of thrombin and insulin receptors to PLC and PI 3-kinase respectively in 1321N1 cells allowed interactions between these systems to be examined. Thus insulin-stimulated [3H]PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 accumulation was attenuated on co-stimulation of the thrombin receptor, whereas concentrations of [3H]PtdIns(3,4)P2 were transiently enhanced but then reduced. These results indicate that thrombin receptors in 1321N1 cells do not activate PI 3-kinase, but can modulate signalling by this enzyme.
95	NR	8770882	Tyrosine phosphorylation of cellular proteins is an early and key step after activation of the insulin receptor kinase (IRK). The study of the properties of these proteins should contribute to our understanding of insulin action. In rat hepatoma cells overexpressing human insulin receptors (HTC-IR), insulin treatment resulted in rapid tyrosine phosphorylation of proteins of 180, 94, 68, and 60 kDa. When lysates from insulin-treated cells were immunoprecipitated with anti-Syp antibody, subsequent immunoblotting identified p65 and p68, which reacted with anti-Syp, and p6O and p68, which reacted with antiphosphotyrosine antibody. Thus, insulin treatment yielded tyrosine phosphorylation of both Syp and a Syp-associated p6O molecule. When lysates from insulin-treated cells were adsorbed with a glutathione S-transferase (GST)-Syp-Src homology-2 (SH2) fusion protein, tyrosine- phosphorylated p6O was sequestered. After subjecting lysates to SDS-PAGE, the GST-SypSH2 fusion protein was found to bind to p18O, p94, and p6O. Thus, Syp associates directly with a 60-kDa IRK substrate via its SH2 domains. Syp-associated p6O differed from the 60- to 62-kDa proteins, associating with ras guanosine triphosphatase-activating protein, which also underwent modest tyrosine phosphorylation in response to insulin. Preadsorption of cell lystates with antibody against the 85-kDa subunit (p85) of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase substantially reduced the amount of p60 subsequently immunoprecipitated by anti-Syp. Thus, p60 associates with both Syp and p85. The amount of tyrosine-phosphorylated p60 exceeded that of p180 in anti-Syp immunoprecipitates, whereas their proportion was comparable in anti-p85 immunoprecipitates. Grb2 was also observed in the anti-Syp immunoprecipitates. When lysates from insulin-treated cells were adsorbed with GST-p85SH2 domains or GST-Grb2, the subsequent eluates contained tyrosine-phosphorylated p60, as determined by immunoblotting with antiphosphotyrosine. Membrane binding assays using GST fusion proteins showed that these associations were direct. Studies in rat liver, muscle, and adipose tissue identified insulin-dependent association of Syp, Grb2, and p85 with tyrosine-phosphorylated p60 in adipose tissue only. We conclude that insulin treatment of HTC-IR cells and rat adipose tissue results in the tyrosine phosphorylation of p60, which might participate in the recruitment of downstream effectors involved in insulin signal transduction.
95	NR	8708550	NA
95	NR	8662827	The insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) is the major intracellular substrate of insulin and insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) receptor tyrosine kinase activity, and this protein has been found to be overexpressed in human hepatocellular carcinomas. IRS-1 contains several src homology 2 (SH2) binding motifs that interact following tyrosyl phosphorylation with SH2-containing proteins, and this interaction may be essential for transmitting the growth signal from the cell surface to the nucleus. We have previously reported that overexpression of IRS-1 may induce neoplastic transformation of NIH 3T3 cells. This study examines the role of two SH2-containing molecules, namely the Grb2 adapter and Syp tyrosine phosphatase proteins as important components of the cellular transforming activity of IRS-1. Mutations of tyrosine 897 in the YVNI motif (Y897F) and of tyrosine 1180 in the YIDL motif (Y1180F) reduced the intracellular interaction of IRS-1 with Grb2 and Syp proteins, respectively. Furthermore, a single mutation at either Phe-897 or Phe-1180 substantially but not completely reduced IGF-I-dependent transforming activity of IRS-1, whereas creation of a double mutation of both tyrosine residues (Y897F/Y1180F) strikingly attenuated the transforming activity of IRS-1. Stable expression of the IRS-1 mutant constructs in NIH 3T3 cells was associated with a lower level of activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MAPKK)/MAPK cascade following IGF-I stimulation compared with cells stably transfected with the "wild-type" IRS-1 gene. These results suggest that IRS-1-induced cellular transformation requires an interaction with both Grb2 and Syp signal transduction molecules since neither interaction alone appears to be required, and this event subsequently leads to activation of the MAPKK/MAPK cascade.
95	NR	8660383	Wortmannin is an inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3'-kinase, a cellular kinase activated by docking to phosphotyrosyl residues of insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) that can also phosphorylate serine residues on IRS-1 in vitro. After treatment of hepatoma cells with 100 nM wortmannin, the tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1 in response to insulin was increased by 38.3 +/- 3.3% while its phosphoserine/threonine content was reduced by 19%. Treatment with 1 microM wortmannin further increased IRS-1 tyrosine phosphorylation to 180% of control, while under these conditions, tyrosine phosphorylation of the IR substrate p52 Shc was reduced to less than 50% of control. Thus, alteration of the serine phosphorylation of IR substrates by a wortmannin-sensitive kinase may regulate post-insulin receptor signaling pathways by differential modulation of their insulin-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation.
95	NR	8655582	Receptor tyrosine kinases play essential roles in morphogenesis and differentiation of epithelia. Here we examined various tyrosine kinase receptors, which are preferentially expressed in epithelia (c-met, c-ros, c-neu, and the keratin growth factor [KGF] receptor), for their capacity to induce cell motility and branching morphogenesis of epithelial cells. We exchanged the ligand-binding domain of these receptors by the ectodomain of trkA and could thus control signaling by the new ligand, NGF. We demonstrate here that the tyrosine kinases of c-met, c-ros, c-neu, the KGF receptor, and trkA, but not the insulin receptor, induced scattering and increased motility of kidney epithelial cells in tissue culture. Mutational analysis suggests that SHC binding is essential for scattering and increased cell motility induced by trkA. The induction of motility in epithelial cells is thus an important feature of various receptor tyrosine kinases, which in vivo play a role in embryogenesis and metastasis. In contrast, only the c-met receptor promoted branching morphogenesis of kidney epithelial cells in three-dimensional matrices, which resemble the formation of tubular epithelia in development. Interestingly, the ability of c-met to induce morphogenesis could be transferred to trkA, when in a novel receptor hybrid COOH-terminal sequences of c-met (including Y14 to Y16) were fused to the trkA kinase domain. These data demonstrate that tubulogenesis of epithelia is a restricted activity of tyrosine kinases, as yet only demonstrated for the c-met receptor. We predict the existence of specific substrates that mediate this morphogenesis signal.
95	NR	8662982	The ret/ptc2 papillary thyroid cancer oncogene, an oncogenic form of the c-Ret receptor tyrosine kinase, is the product of a somatic crossover event fusing the dimerization domain of the type Ialpha regulatory subunit of cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase (RI) with the tyrosine kinase domain of c-Ret. Mitogenic activity of Ret/ptc2 required dimerization via the N terminus of RI and a tyrosine residue located C-terminal to the kinase core of Ret, Tyr-586 (Durick, K., Yao, V. J., Borrello, M. G., Bongarzone, I., Pierotti, M. A. and Taylor, S. S. (1995) J. Biol. Chem. 270, 24642-24645). Using the yeast two-hybrid system, Ret/ptc2 binding proteins were identified, and the sites of interaction with Ret/ptc2 were mapped. The SH2 domains of phospholipase Cgamma and Grb10 were both identified, and binding depended on phosphorylation of Tyr-539 and Tyr-429, respectively. These interactions, however, were not required for mitogenic signaling. The second of the three LIM domains in Enigma (Wu, R. Y., and Gill, G. N. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269, 25085-25090) was also identified as a Ret/ptc2 binding domain. Enigma, a 455-residue protein, was discovered based on its interaction with the insulin receptor through the C-terminal LIM domain. Although the association with Enigma required Tyr-586 of Ret/ptc2, the interaction was phosphorylation-independent. In contrast to the SH2 interactions, disruption of the interaction with Enigma abolished Ret/ptc2 mitogenic signaling, suggesting that LIM domain recognition of an unphosphorylated tyrosine-based motif is required for Ret signal transduction.
95	NR	8732681	Insulin is a well known mitotic agent for neuroblastoma cells. Human SK-N-BE neuroblastoma cells stably transfected with the estrogen receptor, however, undergo growth arrest and differentiation when treated with insulin. These effects were shown to be due to an insulin-dependent activation of the unliganded estrogen receptor. Here, we demonstrate that this activation involves the AF-2 COOH-terminal domain of the estrogen receptor and that the communication between estrogen and insulin receptor systems occurs via selected and specific transduction signals. In fact, by the use of dominant negative and dominant positive mutants we demonstrate that p21ras is essential for insulin and estrogen receptor coupling. With pharmacological tools, we prove that PI 3'kinase does not contribute to this cross-talk and that protein kinase C triggers transduction signals that act in synergism with p21ras. These results prove the intricacy of all these intracellular paths of communication. The finding that, in neuroblastoma cells, selected signal transduction systems are involved in the insulin-dependent activation of estrogen receptor is of particular interest considering that estrogen receptor might restrict the role played by insulin during the differentiation of neural cells and interfere with its proliferative potential while allowing its regulation of other functions related to cell survival.
95	NR	8626623	The sphingomyelin pathway is a newly described signal transduction pathway mediating the action of several cytokines including tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF). TNF was recently shown to interfere with insulin-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of the insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1). In this work we examined the possible effect of direct activation of the sphingomyelin pathway on insulin-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1. Incubation of the insulin-sensitive rat hepatoma Fao cells with bacterial sphingomyelinase (SMase) that causes membrane hydrolysis of sphingomyelin led to a time- and dose-dependent decrease in insulin-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1. The effect was apparent after 10 min of incubation and with a dose of 10 milliunits/ml SMase. It was not associated with a decrease in insulin receptor autophosphorylation. In addition, SMase treatment interrupted the association of the 85-kDa catalytic subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase with IRS-1. A similar impact on IRS-1 tyrosine phosphorylation was observed after addition of cell-permeable ceramide analogs (C2 and C6). Comparable changes in IRS-1 tyrosine phosphorylation and electrophoretic mobility were found after exposure of cells to either TNF, SMase, or ceramide. Our findings suggest that TNF may utilize the sphingomyelin pathway in its effect on the insulin-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1.
95	NR	8726353	In order to examine alterations in the phosphorylation state of proteins involved in insulin action that might accompany the reduced growth state of density-arrested cells, we measured the insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of the receptor and high M(r) cellular substrates of the receptor kinase in rat hepatoma cells at different cell densities. As cell density increased from 2 x 10(5) to 3.2 x 10(6) per 35-mm well, the rate of DNA synthesis fell to 22% of control, while insulin-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of high M(r) receptor substrates ("pp185") was enhanced to 198% of control, without a change in the abundance of insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-1 protein. In anti-IRS-1 immunoprecipitates, tyrosine phosphorylation was increased by only 30%, suggesting that increased tyrosine phosphorylation of additional high M(r) proteins (e.g., IRS-2) accounted for much of the observed increase in tyrosine phosphorylation of the receptor substrates. In spite of increased tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1 and total pp185-related proteins, however, cells studied at high growth density exhibited a 25% decrease in IRS-1-associated phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase activity and only a 39% increase in phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase activity in antiphosphotyrosine immunoprecipitates. To explore the potential role of hepatic protein-tyrosine phosphatases (PTPases) in the hyperphosphorylation of pp185 proteins, we found by immunoblotting that at high cell density the intracellular PTPase PTP1B and the transmembrane PTPase LAR were reduced in abundance by 49% and 55%, respectively, while the abundance of the SH2-domain containing PTPase SH-PTP2 was increased by 48%. These data demonstrate that the attenuation of post-receptor signaling by insulin in hepatoma cells at increasing growth density involves changes in endogenous substrate phosphorylation which may result from alterations in specific PTPases implicated in the regulation of the insulin action pathway.
95	NR	8657738	The effect of a purified extract of the flowering herb of Fagopyrum esculentum (buckwheat) on various protein kinases involved in signal transduction was examined. We observed that buckwheat contains red fluorescent compounds having photosensitizing properties. Spectrophotometric analysis of the extract has indicated structural similarity to hypericin. Dose- and light-dependent inhibition of various protein kinases was observed. The purified buckwheat extract strongly inhibited two receptor-associated protein tyrosine kinases (EGF-R and Ins-R) and a Ser/Thr kinase (PK-C) at an ng/ml concentration range. Selectivity was exhibited as a decreased sensitivity to cytosolic PTKs and protein kinase CK-2. The protein kinases are important components of the signal transduction pathway. Aberration of signal transduction is a hallmark of several proliferative diseases. Our results indicate that photosensitizing compounds in buckwheat are potential antiproliferative agents.
95	NR	8607861	Insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) is a multisite docking protein implicated in mitogenic signaling following activation of the insulin and insulin-like growth factor I receptors. In the present study we characterized IRS-1 expression in human pancreatic cancer. Northern blot analysis revealed high levels of IRS-1 mRNA transcripts in ASPC-1 and MIA PaCa-2 human pancreatic cancer cell lines, and lower levels in COLO-357, PANC-1, and T3M4 cells. Immunoblotting with anti-IRS-1 antibodies indicated that IRS-1 protein levels paralleled IRS-1 mRNA levels. Analysis of RNA isolated from normal and cancerous human pancreatic tissues indicated that 7 of 16 pancreatic cancer samples overexpressed IRS-1 mRNA transcripts by comparison with the normal pancreas and that insulin mRNA levels were abundant in many tumors. These data suggest that IRS-1 contributes to the signaling pathways that lead to excessive growth stimulation in human pancreatic cancer.
95	NR	8622697	The receptor insulin substrate 1 protein (IRS-1) is a specific substrate for insulin receptor tyrosine kinase. Expression and tyrosyl phosphorylation of IRS-1 play an important role during normal hepatocyte growth, and the gene is overexpressed in hepatocellular carcinoma tissue. We determined if IRS-1 overexpression directly contributes to cellular transformation. The human IRS-1 gene was subcloned into a mammalian expression vector driven by the cytomegalovirus early promoter. NIH 3T3 cells transiently transfected with this vector subsequently developed transformed foci. Several stably transfected cell lines were established, and they grew efficiently under low-serum conditions and formed colonies when plated in soft agar. Cell lines overexpressing IRS-1 displayed increased tyrosyl phosphorylation of IRS-1 and association with Grb2 but not with the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3' kinase. Since Grb2 is a component of the son-of-sevenless-Ras pathway and upstream in the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade, enzymatic activities of the major components of this cascade, such as MAPK kinase and MAPK were evaluated and found to be substantially increased in three independent cell lines with IRS-1 protein overexpression. Such cells, when injected into nude mice, were highly tumorigenic, and there may be a correlation between the degree of MAPK activation and tumor growth rate. This report describes the generation of a transformed phenotype by overexpression of a molecule without a catalytic domain far upstream in the signal transduction cascade and suggests that prolonged activation of MAPKs by this mechanism may be one of the molecular events related to hepatocellular transformation.
95	NR	8612625	In this study, we have demonstrated that human retinoblastoma Y79 cells produce insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) type I and type II and release them into the medium. We have also ascertained, by means of competitive studies and cross-linking procedure, that Y79 cells contain the type-I IGF receptor (IGF-IR). Furthermore, surface-bound IGF-I is internalised by the receptor, then degraded to amino acids. Insulin, IGF-I and IGF-II caused down-regulation of IGF-IR; the effect is concentration and time dependent. Scatchard analysis demonstrated that incubation with insulin markedly decreased the binding capacity measured for IGF-I while the apparent Kd value calculated for IGF-I binding was not significantly modified. IGF-I, IGF-II and insulin induced tyrosine phosphorylation of IGF-IR. Tyrosine phosphorylation of this receptor with, however, a less strong signal, was detectable even in cells cultured in serum-free medium without the addition of any exogenous growth factor. Similar results have been found concerning the tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS 1). Tyrosine phosphorylation of both IGF-IR and IRS 1, either under basal conditions or after stimulation with growth factors, was strongly inhibited when alpha-IR3, a monoclonal antibody to IGF-IR, was added to the culture. IGF-I was capable of inducing Y79 cell proliferation and its effect was entirely inhibited by the addition of alpha-IR3. This antibody also markedly reduced the proliferation of Y79 cells cultured in serum-free medium not supplemented with stimulatory factors. Our results indicate that IGF-I and IGF-IR mediate an autocrine growth mechanism in Y79 cells.
95	NR	8596638	The protein Grb2 plays a central role in signalling by receptor protein-tyrosine kinases, where its SH2 domain binds to the receptor and its two SH3 domains link to effectors. One target effector is Sos, so Grb2 links receptor protein-tyrosine kinases with the Ras signalling pathway. The SH3 domains can also couple to other signalling proteins, including Vav, c-Abl and dynamin. We have identified several bands in glial and medulloblastoma tumours that are recognized by Grb2 but these did not correspond to any known protein. Here we use recombinant Grb2 to isolate a complementary DNA called Gab1 (for Grb2-associated binder-1). Gab1 shares amino-acid homology and several structural features with IRS-1 (insulin-receptor substrate-1; refs 6,7), is a substrate of the EGF and insulin receptors, and can act as a docking protein for several SH2-containing proteins. Over-expression of Gab1 enhances cell growth and results in transformation. We conclude that Gab1 is a new protein in EGF and insulin receptor signalling which could integrate signals from different systems.
95	NR	8593783	Regulation of ligand-mediated signal transduction through transmembrane tyrosine kinase growth factor receptors involves phosphorylation of tyrosine residues in the intracellular domain of the receptor. The insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) receptor contains three tyrosine residues in the carboxy-terminal domain at positions 1250, 1251, and 1316. Of these, only the tyrosine at position 1316 is conserved in the homologous position of the insulin receptor. Mutational analysis was used to study the role of these tyrosines in specific outcomes of IGF-I-mediated signal transduction. Mutations in the human IGF-I receptor were either replacement of tyrosines 1250 and 1251 with phenylalanine and histidine (yyFH), respectively, or replacement of the conserved distal tyrosine (position 1316) with phenylalanine (yCF). The yyFH mutation results in an IGF-I receptor with the amino acids found in the homologous position of the human insulin receptor. Cells overexpressing mutated IGF-I receptors were compared with cells expressing only endogenous IGF-I receptors or overexpressing wild-type IGF-I receptors. The ability of yyFH mutant IGF-I receptors to autophosphorylate the beta-subunit or phosphorylate insulin receptor substrate-1 was not significantly different from wild-type type IGF-I receptors. However, one or both of the proximal tyrosine residues (positions 1250 and 1251) in the carboxy-terminus of the IGF-I receptor are essential for IGF-I-stimulation of mitogenic and tumorigenic pathways. IGF-I-induced mitogenesis, measured as thymidine incorporation and cellular proliferation, was abrogated in cells overexpressing mutant IGF-I receptors with replacement of the proximal double tyrosines (positions 1250 and 1251). Fibroblasts expressing this mutant IGF-I receptor formed fewer tumors than the negative control cells, whereas cells expressing wild-type IGF-I receptors formed large tumors in all recipient mice injected. Conversely, cells expressing mutant IGF-I receptors with only the conserved distal tyrosine (position 1316) replaced had slightly reduced IGF-I-stimulated beta-subunit autophosphorylation, thymidine incorporation, and cellular proliferation when compared with cells expressing wild-type receptors. Phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate-1 by the yCF mutant receptors was not impaired. Despite the ability of these mutant receptors to stimulate mitogenic growth, fibroblasts expressing this mutant receptor were also incapable of forming tumors in recipient nude mice. The distal tyrosine (position 1316) of the IGF-I receptor is crucial for tumor formation but is not essential for IGF-I stimulated mitogenesis. Thus, the tyrosine moieties in the carboxy-terminus of the IGF-I receptor participate in the signal transduction pathways that affect the mitogenic and tumorigenic potentials of cells expressing mutant IGF-I receptors.
95	NR	8557682	Antisense-mediated suppression of the transmembrane protein-tyrosine phosphatase (PTPase) LAR has been shown previously to increase insulin-dependent phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase) activation by greater than 300% in the rat hepatoma cell line McA-RH7777. Here, insulin-dependent insulin receptor tyrosine kinase activation was examined with recombinant insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) as the substrate and shown to be 3-fold greater in cells with suppressed LAR levels. Consistent with a receptor level effect, in vivo insulin-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of both IRS-1 and Shc was increased by a similar 3-fold with LAR suppression. These increases in IRS-1 and Shc phosphorylation were paralleled by increases in insulin-dependent PI 3-kinase association with IRS-1 and activation of the MAP kinase pathway. Reduced LAR levels also resulted in increases of over 300% and 250% in epidermal growth factor (EGF)- and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)-dependent receptor autophosphorylation, respectively, as well as a severalfold increase in substrate tyrosine phosphorylation. In a post-receptor response, EGF- and HGF-dependent MAP kinase activation was increased by 300% and 350%, respectively, with LAR suppression. Similarly, growth factor-dependent PI 3-kinase activation was increased in LAR antisense expressing cells when compared to null vector expressing cells. These results demonstrate that the transmembrane PTPase LAR modulates ligand-dependent activation of at least three receptor tyrosine kinases.
95	NR	8550552	The tyrosines in the cytoplasmic domain of an oncogenic human insulin-like growth factor I receptor (gag-IGFR) were systematically mutated to phenylalanines to investigate the role of those tyrosines in the enzymatic and biological function of the gag-IGFR. Our results indicate that tyrosines 1131, 1135, 1136, and 1221 are important for the receptor protein-tyrosine kinase (PTK) activity. However, mutation of Tyr-1136 only slightly affects the kinase activity but dramatically reduces the transforming ability and overall substrate phosphorylation, in particular, annexin II, which is strongly phosphorylated by the gag-IGFR but not by the Phe-1136 mutant. Single mutation of either Tyr-943 or Tyr-950 resulted in significantly reduced phosphorylation of the receptor but not on its PTK activity or transforming ability. Tyr-950 together with its surrounding sequence is involved in mediating the interaction between the gag-IGFR and insulin receptor substrate 1. Our data also suggest that Tyr-1316 is involved in phosphorylation of phospholipase C-gamma, which is, however, not important for cell transforming activity. Overall, our study has identified several tyrosine residues of IGFR important for its PTK activity and substrate interaction. The transforming potential of the gag-IGFR correlates well with its ability to phosphorylate overall cellular substrates and to activate phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase via insulin receptor substrate 1.
95	NR	8701079	Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-I) is a major feedback regulator of pituitary GH secretion, with defined actions occurring at both the hypothalamus and pituitary. The IGF-I gene is expressed in the anterior pituitary in a GH-dependent manner thus providing for both endocrine-as well as autocrine-mediated GH regulation. In turn, IGF-I selectively and specifically inhibits GH gene transcription and secretion, its attenuating effects on nascent GH mRNA synthesis being demonstrable within 1 h. Binding of IGF-I to its pituitary cell surface receptor is followed by rapid activation of the intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity of the receptor beta-subunit and phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1). Structure-function studies of the human IGF-I receptor were performed in stable, GH-secreting transfectants expressing either the cDNA encoding the wild-type (WT) human IGF receptor and exhibiting enhanced IGF-I responsiveness, or cDNAs encoding IGF-I receptor mutants and a truncated, kinase-deficient receptor (952STOP). 950Tyr situated on the submembrane receptor domain was found to be critical for transducing the IGF-I signal to the GH gene. IGF-I failed to suppress GH secretion by signalling endogenous rat IGF-I receptors when hybrid receptors were formed with kinase-deficient human receptors and rat hemi-receptors. This dominant negative effect on hormone secretion was also evidenced when mitogenic IGF-I signals were blocked in vitro and in vivo by these hybrid receptors. Using similar doses of IGF-I, the IGF-I receptor cell transfectants also demonstrated ligand-dependent activation of ERKs in pituitary cells. In conclusion, the pituitary IGF-I receptor mediates the negative feedback regulation of GH. Thus, IGF-I receptor mass may determine GH responses to malnutrition, pregnancy, and refeeding. IGF-I receptor mutations may also prove useful to abrogate the growth of IGF-I-dependent tumors. These structure-function studies of the human IGF-I receptor provide mechanistic insights into both metabolic control of the GH axis, as well as target tissue proliferative characteristics.
95	NR	8530527	We have previously reported on the expression of interleukin-4 receptors (IL-4R) on many human epithelial cancer cells; however, the binding characteristics, structure, function, and signal transduction through the IL-4R in cancer cells is not known. IL-4 binding characteristics were determined in human colon carcinoma cell lines by a 125I-IL-4 binding assay, which demonstrated that the HT-29 and WiDr colon cancer cell lines expressed high affinity IL-4R (Kd = 200 pM). Cross-linking experiments revealed a major band of 140 kDa and a broad band at 70 kDa. While the common gamma chain of IL-2R is associated with IL-4R in immune cells and is similar in size to the 70-kDa protein, this chain was not expressed in these colon cancer cells. Interestingly, IL-13, which has many functions similar to IL-4, inhibited 125I-IL-4 binding to both the 140- and 70-kDa molecules. Next, we investigated the mechanism of IL-4-induced signal transduction in colon cancer cells. After stimulation with IL-4, a 170-kDa band was primarily phosphorylated within 1 min of exposure and was identified as insulin receptor substrate-1. In addition, by immunoprecipitation assay, three other phosphorylated bands were identified as JAK1, JAK2, and Tyk2 tyrosine kinases. The phosphorylation of JAK1 and JAK2 was induced by IL-4 stimulation; however, Tyk2 was constitutively phosphorylated, and IL-4 treatment further augmented this phosphorylation. The kinetics and in vitro kinase assays demonstrated that JAK1, JAK2, and Tyk2 were phosphorylated within minutes and that JAK1 and JAK2 were activated after IL-4 exposure. Contrary to observations in immune cells. JAK3 mRNA was neither detected in colon cancer cells nor did IL-4 treatment cause phosphorylation of JAK3. These data indicate that in colon carcinoma cells JAK1, JAK2, Tyk2, and insulin receptor substrate-1 are phosphorylated after IL-4 stimulation. In addition, as is the case in lymphoid cells, IL-4 activated and phosphorylated signal transducers and activators of transcription (IL-4-STAT or STAT-6) protein in both colon cancer cell lines. These results indicate that the IL-4R complex is composed of different subunits in different tissues and shares a component with the IL-13R complex. In addition, we demonstrate for the first time that like its family members (e.g. IL-3 and GM-CSF), IL-4 can phosphorylate and activate JAK-2 kinase.
95	NR	8927049	Vanadate and insulin both function as unique complete mitogens for SV40-transformed 3T3T cells, designated CSV3-1, but not for nontransformed 3T3T cells. The mitogenic effects induced by vanadate and insulin in CSV3-1 cells are mediated by different signaling mechanisms. For example, vanadate does not stimulate the tyrosine phosphorylation of the insulin receptor beta-subunit nor the 170 kDa insulin receptor substrate-1. Instead, vanadate induces a marked increase in tyrosine phosphorylation of 55 and 64 kDa proteins that is not observed in insulin-stimulated CSV3-1 cells. Perhaps most interestingly, vandate-induced mitogenesis is associated with the selective induction of c-jun and junB expression without significantly inducing c-fos or c-myc. Furthermore, treatment of CSV3-1 cells with genistein abolishes the effects of vanadate on protein tyrosine phosphorylation and c-jun induction. These and related data suggest that modulation of protein tyrosine phosphorylation and c-jun and junB expression may serve the critical roles in mediating vandate-induced mitogenesis in SV40-transformed cells.
95	NR	7486686	We have characterized an insulin-dependent T-cell lymphoma, LB, devoid of IGF-I receptor, which undergoes insulin stimulation and cell proliferation both in vitro and in vivo. In these cells, the mitogenic response can be evoked only through binding of insulin to its own receptor. This lymphoma is thus a good model for studying the molecular mechanisms involved in insulin mitogenicity. The high level of activated Ras in LB cells, even under nonproliferative conditions, shows that activation of Ras is insufficient for mitogenicity. It has been suggested earlier that separate pathways of signal transduction may emerge from Ras. The decision to activate a certain signaling pathway may depend on the activation state of other signaling routes in the cell. This may be the case in LB cells, where a signaling component activated by insulin works in concert with the Ras signaling pathway to induce mitogenesis. Yet it is still unclear whether activated Ras is a prerequisite for the insulin-induced response in LB cells.
95	NR	7657666	We have demonstrated previously that dexamethasone treatment of HepG2 cells caused an enhancement of insulin's metabolic effects (Kosaki, A., and Webster, N. J. (1993) J. Biol. Chem. 268, 21990-21996). This correlated with increased expression of the mRNA encoding the B isoform of the insulin receptor (IR). In the present study, we have demonstrated that dexamethasone treatment caused in addition an enhancement in insulin-stimulated immediate-early gene expression (c-fos and egr-1). Dexamethasone treatment caused an increase in in vivo IR autophosphorylation and insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) phosphorylation both early events in the insulin signaling pathway. Furthermore, the IRS-1 phosphorylation was distinctly left shifted, although the level of IRS-1 protein was unchanged. Total cellular tyrosine phosphatase activity was unaltered when assayed with 32P-labeled IR and IRS-1. Studies in vitro on wheat-germ agglutinin-purified receptors showed that the B isoform of the IR had increased kinase activity both toward itself and the exogenous substrates poly.glu4:tyr1 and recombinant IRS-1 protein. In addition, two-dimensional tryptic phosphopeptide maps indicated that the B isoform has an additional phosphopeptide that is not seen for the A isoform. In conclusion, it appears that the B isoform of the IR signals more efficiently than the A isoform in HepG2 cells.
95	NR	7544790	Protein-tyrosine phosphatases (PTPases) have been postulated to balance the steady-state phosphorylation and the activation state of the insulin receptor and its substrate proteins. To explore whether PTP1B, a widely expressed, non-receptor-type PTPase, regulates insulin signaling, we used osmotic shock to load rat KRC-7 hepatoma cells with affinity-purified neutralizing antibodies that immunoprecipitate and inactivate the enzymatic activity of recombinant rat PTP1B in vitro. In cells loaded with PTP1B antibody, insulin-stimulated DNA synthesis and phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase activity were increased by 42% and 38%, respectively, compared with control cells loaded with preimmune IgG (p < 0.005). In order to characterize the potential site(s) of action of PTP1B in insulin signaling, we also determined that insulin-stimulated receptor autophosphorylation and insulin receptor substrate 1 tyrosine phosphorylation were increased 2.2- and 2.0-fold, respectively, and that insulin-stimulated receptor kinase activity toward an exogenous peptide substrate was increased by 57% in the PTP1B antibody-loaded cells. Osmotic loading did not alter the cellular content of PTP1B protein, suggesting that the antibody acts in the cell by sterically blocking catalytic interactions between PTP1B and its physiological substrates. These studies demonstrate that PTP1B has a role in the negative regulation of insulin signaling and acts, at least in part, directly at the level of the insulin receptor. These results also show that insulin signaling can be enhanced by the inhibition of specific PTPases, a maneuver that has potential clinical relevance in the treatment of insulin resistance and Type II diabetes mellitus.
95	NR	7543196	The exposure of mammalian cells to ultraviolet radiation (UV) may lead to DNA damage resulting in mutation and thus possibly cancer, while irradiation can further act as a potent tumor promoter. In addition UV induces p21ras-mediated signalling leading to activation of transcription factors such as AP-1 and NF-kappa B, as well as activation of the Src tyrosine kinase. This 'UV-response' has been well studied in mammalian cells and furthermore is conserved in yeast, however the most upstream components of this signal transduction pathway have remained elusive. Here we show that UV rapidly activates both the EGF receptor and insulin receptor, as shown by tyrosine phosphorylation of these receptors. We demonstrate that this activation is due to autophosphorylation as it only occurs in cells containing receptors with a functional kinase domain. We have further analysed the propagation of the UV-induced signal to downstream events such as, IRS-1 and Shc tyrosine phosphorylation, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase activation, leukotriene synthesis, MAP kinase activation and gene induction all of which are activated by UV irradiation. Importantly, we demonstrate that in cells expressing a 'kinase-dead' receptor mutant the UV-response is inhibited, blocking leukotriene synthesis, MAP kinase activation and transcriptional induction. Furthermore, prior-stimulation of cells with UV appears to reduce further responsiveness to addition of growth factor suggesting a common signaling pathway. These data demonstrate a critical role for receptor-mediated events in regulating the response mammalian cells to UV exposure.
95	NR	7542742	Mouse embryo cells expressing a wild-type number of insulin-like growth factor I receptors (IGF-IR) (W cells) can be transformed either by simian virus 40 large T antigen (SV40 T) or by overexpressed insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1), singly transfected. Neither SV40 T antigen nor IRS-1, individually, can transform mouse embryo cells with a targeted disruption of the IGF-IR genes (R- cells). However, cotransfection of SV40 T antigen and IRS-1 does transform R- cells. In this study, using different antibodies and different cell lines, we found that SV40 T antigen and IRS-1 are coprecipitated from cell lysates in a specific fashion, regardless of whether the lysates are immunoprecipitated with an antibody to SV40 T antigen or an antibody to IRS-1. The same antibody to SV40 T antigen, however, fails to coprecipitate another substrate of IGF-IR, the transforming protein Shc, and two other signal-transducing molecules, Grb2 and Sos. Finally, an SV40 T antigen lacking the amino-terminal 250 amino acids fails to coprecipitate IRS-1 and also fails to transform R- cells overexpressing mouse IRS-1. These experiments indicate that IRS-1 associates with SV40 T antigen and that this association plays a critical role in the combined ability of these proteins to transform R- cells. This finding is discussed in light of the crucial role of the IGF-IR in the establishment and maintenance of the transformed phenotype.
95	NR	7622464	Herbimycin A is an ansamycin antibiotic isolated as an agent that reverses morphological transformation induced by v-src. Although herbimycin A is widely used as a tool for inhibiting multiple tyrosine protein kinases and tyrosine kinase-activated signal transduction, its mechanism of action is not well defined and includes a decrease in both tyrosine kinase protein levels and activity (Uehara, Y., Murakami, Y., Sugimoto, Y., and Mizuno, S. (1989) Cancer Res. 49, 780-785). We now show that herbimycin A induces a profound decrease in the total cellular activity of transmembrane tyrosine kinase receptors, such as insulin-like growth factor, insulin, and epidermal growth factor receptors. A substantial proportion of the in vivo inhibition could be explained by an increase in the rate of degradation. The enhanced degradation of insulin-like growth factor-insulin receptor was prevented by inhibitors of the 20S proteasome, whereas neither lysosomotropic agents nor general serine- and cysteine-protease inhibitors were active in preventing receptor degradation induced by herbimycin A. Moreover, in a temperature-sensitive mutant cell line defective in the E1-catalyzed activation of ubiquitin, herbimycin A treatment at the restrictive temperature did not result in the degradation of insulin receptor. These results suggest that herbimycin A represents a novel class of drug that targets the degradation of tyrosine kinases by the 20S proteasome. The ubiquitin dependence of this process indicates that this degradation of tyrosine kinases might involve the 20S proteasome as the proteolytic core of the ubiquitin-dependent 26S protease.
95	NR	7789317	We have shown previously that insulin at the physiological concentration suppresses hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) gene expression in cultured human hepatoma Hep3B cells, and this suppression phenomenon is concomitant with the stimulation of cell proliferation. We have now examined whether these two distinct insulin actions on the Hep3B cells are mediated through the same or different signaling pathways. After prolonged treatment with high concentration of tumor promoter, 12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate (TPA), the protein kinase C-alpha (PKC-alpha) level in the Hep3B cells was diminished and could not be detected by Western blot analysis. Under this condition, TPA treatment has no effect on the number or affinity of the insulin receptor on Hep3B cells. However, insulin-stimulated cell proliferation was completely abolished in the PKC-alpha depleted cells. In contrast, insulin still suppressed HBsAg gene expression with the same ED50 (approximately 0.5 nM) as the control cell. The induction of proto-oncogene egr-1 (early-growth-regulatory-1) by insulin and TPA under similar conditions were also examined. Both insulin and TPA stimulated egr-1 gene expression up to 10-fold in the control cell, but neither of these two agents showed any effect on egr-1 gene expression in the PKC-alpha down-regulated Hep3B cells. These observations indicate that the PKC-alpha may be involved in the insulin induced egr-1 expression and cell proliferation but not in the insulin suppressed HBsAg gene expression in human hepatoma cells.
95	NR	7543052	Focal adhesion kinase (pp125FAK) is a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase which colocalizes with integrins to focal contacts, sites where multiple proteins interact to regulate the assembly of the actin cytoskeleton. Autophosphorylation and activation of pp125FAK occur after integrin clustering or cell adhesion to ligands through cognate integrin receptors and are postulated to mediate integrin signaling events. In this report we examined pp125FAK expression and phosphorylation in normal human melanocytes, an adherent human metastatic melanoma cell line (SKMEL28), and a nonadherent human metastatic melanoma cell line (SKMEL1). We show that SKMEL28 cells express constitutively phosphorylated pp125FAK and that pp125FAK phosphorylation in melanocytes is induced by phorbol esters and growth factors present in melanocyte growth medium. Focal adhesion kinase phosphorylation could be enhanced by b1 integrin-activating antibodies in human melanocytes, but not in SKMEL28 cells. In contrast with SKMEL28 cells, constitutive phosphorylation of pp125FAK was not observed in SKMEL1 cells, and incubation with activating b1 integrin antibodies had no effect on pp125FAK phosphorylation. Absence of pp125FAK phosphorylation in SKMEL1 cells was not due to lack of expression of pp125FAK, as shown by immunoprecipitation of the pp125FAK protein from cell lysates. However, b1 integrin expression was significantly less in SKMEL1 cells than in human melanocytes and SKMEL28 cells. This study further supports the importance of integrins in pp125FAK-mediated signaling and indicates that transformation-related changes in pp125FAK phosphorylation exist in human melanocytes and melanoma cells.
95	NR	7539611	Activation of the tyrosine kinase activity of the insulin receptor by autophosphorylation leads to phosphorylation of cellular substrates on tyrosine. Thus far, the best characterized is the insulin receptor substrate (IRS) 1, which has been proposed to serve as a docking protein for other molecules involved in signal transduction. A number of other proteins that become phosphorylated in response to insulin have been identified, some of which are reported to be tissue-specific. A 60 kDa phosphoprotein has been detected in adipocytes after insulin stimulation [Lavan and Lienhard (1993) J. Biol. Chem. 268, 5921-5928]. We have identified a protein of similar molecular mass in rat hepatoma cells transfected with the human insulin receptor. The 60 kDa protein in hepatoma cells is tyrosine-phosphorylated in response to insulin in a dose-dependent manner, with maximal phosphorylation occurring at 50 nM insulin. Although the dose-response of p60 phosphorylation mirrors that of IRS-1, the time course is slightly slower, with maximal phosphorylation observed 5 min after addition of insulin. Like the adipocyte protein, the 60 kDa protein detected in liver cells binds to the SH2 domain of the p85 regulatory subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, but not to other SH2 domains. Binding of p60 to p85 is similar to the interaction between p85 and IRS-1 in that a tyrosine-phosphorylated peptide containing the YVXM motif can inhibit the association. The presence of this 60 kDa tyrosine-phosphorylated protein in adipocytes and hepatoma cells suggests that it represents another important intermediate in the insulin-receptor signal-transduction pathway.
95	NR	7744881	Interleukin-13 (IL-13) and interleukin-4 (IL-4) are related in structure and function and are thought to share a common receptor component. We have investigated the signal transduction pathways activated by these two growth factors, as well as insulin, in cell-lines and primary cells of lymphohemopoietic origin. All three factors induced the tyrosine phosphorylation of a protein of 170 kDa (p170), which coimmunoprecipitated with the p85 subunit of P13'-kinase, via high affinity interactions mediated by the SH2 domains of p85. Antibodies raised against the entire insulin-receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) protein immunoprecipitated p170 much less efficiently than they did IRS-1 from 3T3 cells. However, antibodies directed against the conserved pleckstrin homology domain of IRS-1 immunoprecipitated both p170 and IRS-1 with similar efficiency, suggesting they share structural similarities in this region. In lymphohemopoietic cells, IL-13, IL-4, and insulin failed to induce increased tyrosine phosphorylation of Shc, or its association with grb2, modification of Sos1, or activation of erk-1 and erk-2 mitogen-activated protein kinases, suggesting that p170 mediates downstream pathways distinct from those mediated by IRS-1. Both IL-13 and IL-4 induced low levels of tyrosine phosphorylation of Tyk-2 and Jak-1. IL-4 also activated the Jak-3-kinase, but, despite other similarities, IL-13 did not. Insulin failed to activate any of the known members of the Janus family of kinases. In that Jak-3 is reported to associate with the IL-2 gamma c chain, these data suggest that the IL-13 receptor does not utilize this subunit. However, both IL-13 and IL-4 induced tyrosine phosphorylation of the IL-4-140 kDa receptor chain, suggesting that this is a component of both receptors in these cells and accounts for the similarities in signaling pathways shared by IL-13 and IL-4.
95	NR	7647039	The role of the insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) in cellular transformation was studied in R- cells, which are 3T3-like fibroblasts derived from mouse embryos with a targeted disruption of the insulin-like growth factor I receptor gene. These cells cannot be transformed by oncogenes that readily transform cells originating from wild-type littermate embryos (or other 3T3-like cells). In the present study, we demonstrate that in R- cells, the overexpression of the functional IRS-1 protein was sufficient to induce a mitogenic response to insulin but did not promote transformation, as measured by colony formation in soft agar. The coexpression of IRS-1 and the SV40 T antigen, however, induced transformation. Conversely, expression of an antisense IRS-1 RNA reversed the transformed phenotype in wild-type cells carrying the T antigen. Since the type 1 insulin-like growth factor receptor, by itself, is fully transforming, we propose the hypothesis that the transforming competence of this receptor is based on at least two signaling pathways, one of which is IRS-1-dependent, whereas the other(s) can be substituted with the SV40 T antigen.
95	NR	7659087	After insulin stimulation of cells, signaling complexes are formed, containing the insulin receptor (IR), insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1), and phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase. To study the nature of these complexes, we employed purified IR, recombinant IRS-1, antibodies to IR and IRS-1, and fusion proteins containing the two SH2 domains of p85. In intact cells, insulin increased tyrosine phosphorylation of both the IR and IRS-1. Both of these proteins were immunoprecipitated with antibodies to p85. Also, fusion proteins containing the two SH2 domains of p85 directly precipitated both the IR and IRS-1. Next, these signaling complexes were reconstituted in vitro with purified IR, recombinant IRS-1, and the two SH2 domains of p85. In the presence of both SH2 domains of p85, the IR associated with IRS-1. Other data, both in intact cells and in vitro, demonstrated that N- and C-terminal SH2 domains of p85 had preferential binding affinities for the IR and IRS-1, respectively. Studies with an IR mutant truncated in the C terminus indicated that the C-terminal phosphotyrosines of the IR play a major role in interacting with the SH2 domains of p85. In conclusion, both in vivo and in vitro data support a role for p85 in directly linking the IR to IRS-1 via its SH2 domains. The formation of these complexes, therefore, may provide a mechanism for the translocation to the plasma membrane of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase and other molecules that are involved in IR signaling.
95	NR	7542850	Ethanol inhibits insulin (IN) and epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced hepatocyte DNA synthesis. Growth factor receptor kinases, such as IN and EGF, phosphorylate insulin receptor substrate (IRS-1) and p36 protein kinase substrate, respectively, on tyrosine residues. IRS-1 and p36 are thought to be important intracellular signal transduction molecules involved in the regulation of cell growth. These investigations explored the effect of ethanol additions on the expression and tyrosyl phosphorylation (TP) of p36 and IRS-1 in a human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line (FOCUS) in relationship to cell proliferation induced by IN and serum growth factor stimulation. It was found that p36 was constitutively and highly expressed in serum-starved cells and protein, and mRNA levels did not change with cell proliferation induced by growth factors. However, exposure of FOCUS cells to ethanol additions substantially inhibited TP of p36. The early TP of IRS-1 induced by IN stimulation was also reduced by ethanol additions. Finally, there was a parallel decrease of FOCUS cell proliferation in ethanol-exposed cultures. These studies suggest that one possible mechanism of ethanol inhibitory effect on cell proliferation is through reduced TP of putative intracellular signal transduction molecules, such as p36 and IRS-1.
95	NR	7535775	Insulin activates the ras signaling pathway and promotes hematopoietic cell proliferation. One possible mediator in such signaling is the vav proto-oncogene product (p95vav), which is specifically expressed in cells of hematopoietic origin and contains domains typical of guanine nucleotide exchange factors as well as Src homology 2 and Src homology 3 domains. We studied the tyrosine phosphorylation of p95vav in hematopoietic cells expressing insulin receptors. Immunoblotting experiments with an antiphosphotyrosine monoclonal antibody disclosed that insulin induces rapid and transient tyrosine phosphorylation of p95vav in the human U-266 myeloma cell line. These findings were confirmed by immunoprecipitation experiments performed with 32P-labeled cells and phosphoamino acid analysis of the bands corresponding to p95vav. Similarly, insulin-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of p95vav was observed in the human IM-9 and mouse J558L hematopoietic cell lines. Furthermore, insulin treatment of cells led to the association of the Src homology 2 domain of p95vav with the activated beta-subunit of the insulin receptor in vitro. Altogether, these data suggest that p95vav is a substrate for the insulin receptor tyrosine kinase and may be involved in an insulin signaling pathway linking receptor-generated signals to Ras or other GTP-binding proteins in cells of hematopoietic origin.
95	NR	7708684	The platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) receptor is a member of the transmembrane growth factor receptor protein family with intrinsic protein-tyrosine kinase activity. We describe a potent protein-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (CGP 53716) that shows selectivity for the PDGF receptor in vitro and in the cell. The compound shows selectivity for inhibition of PDGF-mediated events such as PDGF receptor autophosphorylation, cellular tyrosine phosphorylation, and c-fos mRNA induction in response to PDGF stimulation of intact cells. In contrast, ligand-induced autophosphorylation of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor, insulin receptor, and the insulin-like growth factor I receptor, as well as c-fos mRNA expression induced by EGF, fibroblast growth factor, and phorbol ester, was insensitive to inhibition by CGP 53716. In antiproliferative assays, the compound was approximately 30-fold more potent in inhibiting PDGF-mediated growth of v-sis-transformed BALB/c 3T3 cells relative to inhibition of EGF-dependent BALB/Mk cells, interleukin-3-dependent FDC-P1 cells, and the T24 bladder carcinoma line. When tested in vivo using highly tumorigenic v-sis- and human c-sis-transformed BALB/c 3T3 cells, CGP 53716 showed antitumor activity at well-tolerated doses. In contrast, CGP 53716 did not show antitumor activity against xenografts of the A431 tumor, which overexpresses the EGF receptor. These findings suggest that CGP 53716 may have therapeutic potential for the treatment of diseases involving abnormal cellular proliferation induced by PDGF receptor activation.
95	NR	7896835	To gain insight into the signal transduction pathways utilized by the Wnt-1-responsive mammary epithelial cell line C57MG, we screened for non-src family member tyrosine kinases expressed in these cells using a polymerase chain reaction-based technique. We identified five cDNA clones encoding receptor tyrosine kinases for which the ligand is known (fibroblast growth factor receptor, platelet-derived growth factor receptor, epithelial growth factor receptor, insulin receptor, and insulin-like growth factor receptor), two putative receptor tyrosine kinases for which the ligand remains to be identified (the products of ryk and the mouse klg homolog), and a novel tyrosine kinase. We cloned cDNAs encoding both the murine and human homologs of this kinase, the sequences of which were subsequently published under the names sky (Ohashi, K., Mizuno, K., Kuma, K., Miyata, T., and Nakamura, T. (1994) Oncogene 9, 699-705) and rse (Mark, M. R., Scadden, D. T., Wang, Z., Gu, Q., Goddard, A., and Godowski, P. J. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269, 10720-10728). Mouse sky RNA levels are abundant in mammary tumors derived from transgenic mice that express wnt-1, fgf-3, or both oncogenes in their mammary glands. However, little or no expression of sky is detected in mammary glands from virgin animals or in preneoplastic mammary glands from wnt-1 transgenic mice. Moreover, we find that the human homolog of sky is expressed at elevated levels when normal human mammary epithelial cells are rendered tumorigenic by the introduction of two viral oncogenes. Transient transfection of the human SKY cDNA into the quail fibrosarcoma cell line QT6 reveals that SKY is an active tyrosine kinase that augments the level of cellular phosphotyrosine. Introduction of murine Sky into RatB1a fibroblasts by retrovirus-mediated gene transfer results in morphological transformation, growth in soft agar, and the formation of tumors in nude mice. These data raise the possibility that the Sky tyrosine kinase is involved in the development and/or progression of mammary tumors.
95	NR	7835279	In the present studies, insulin was found to stimulate in a rat hepatoma cell line (called FAO cells) the tyrosine phosphorylation of the 60-kilodalton p21ras GTPase-activating protein (GAP)-associated protein called p60. Surprisingly, the tyrosine phosphorylation of this protein was also almost equally stimulated by an activator of protein kinase C (PKC), the phorbol ester phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA). The tyrosine phosphorylation of p60 induced by either agent correlated with the formation of the GAP-p60 complex in situ and an increase in the ability of p60 to directly bind to the SH2 domain of GAP in vitro. Several lines of evidence indicated that the PMA-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of p60 occurred through a different mechanism than that induced by insulin. First, the stimulation of tyrosine phosphorylation of p60 by maximal concentrations of the two agents was almost additive. Second, down-regulation of PKC or pretreatment with a specific inhibitor of PKC abolished the ability of PMA to stimulate tyrosine phosphorylation of p60 but had no effect on the insulin stimulation. And third, long-term pretreatment with insulin abolished the insulin response but did not affect the response to PMA. The PMA effect did seem to be mediated via a tyrosine kinase, since it was blocked by quercetin, an inhibitor of tyrosine kinases. These results indicate that both PMA and insulin can equally stimulate in FAO cells the tyrosine phosphorylation of p60 and its association with GAP, although these two agents seem to act via different signaling systems.
95	NR	7529876	Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is a widely expressed nonreceptor protein-tyrosine kinase implicated in integrin-mediated signal transduction pathways and in the process of oncogenic transformation by v-Src. Elevation of FAK's phosphotyrosine content, following both cell adhesion to extracellular matrix substrata and cell transformation by Rous sarcoma virus, correlates directly with an increased kinase activity. To help elucidate the role of FAK phosphorylation in signal transduction events, we used a tryptic phosphopeptide mapping approach to identify tyrosine sites of phosphorylation responsive to both cell adhesion and Src transformation. We have identified four tyrosines, 397, 407, 576, and 577, which are phosphorylated in mouse BALB/3T3 fibroblasts in an adhesion-dependent manner. Tyrosine 397 has been previously recognized as the major site of FAK autophosphorylation. Phosphorylation of tyrosines 407, 576, and 577, which are previously unrecognized sites, is significantly elevated in the presence of c-Src in vitro and v-Src in vivo. Tyrosines 576 and 577 lie within catalytic subdomain VIII--a region recognized as a target for phosphorylation-mediated regulation of protein kinase activity. We found that maximal kinase activity of FAK immune complexes requires phosphorylation of both tyrosines 576 and 577. Our results indicate that phosphorylation of FAK by Src (or other Src family kinases) is an important step in the formation of an active signaling complex.
95	NR	8746448	Neuronal thread proteins (NTPs) are a family of developmentally regulated molecules expressed in central nervous system (CNS) neurons and primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) cell lines. NTP gene expression is modulated with DNA synthesis, neuritic sprouting, and neuronal differentiation. The present study explores the mechanism of insulin modulation of NTP gene expression during neuronal differentiation using PNET cell lines of CNS origin. PNET2 cells underwent neuronal differentiation with neurite outgrowth coupled with transient up-regulation of several species of NTP. In contrast, PNET1 cells failed to differentiate in response to insulin stimulation, although insulin receptors were more abundant than in PNET2 cells. Analysis of the insulin-mediated signal transduction pathway demonstrated that the lack of insulin responsiveness in PNET1 cells was primarily caused by impaired insulin-mediated tyrosyl phosphorylation of the insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1). Correspondingly, the association between phosphatidyl-inositol 3 (PI3) kinase and phosphorylated IRS-1 was reduced in PNET1 compared with PNET2 cells. In contrast, the levels of IRS-1 protein were similar in PNET1 and PNET2 cells, and expression of the insulin receptor beta subunit (Ir beta) and insulin-mediated tyrosyl phosphorylation of the Ir beta were greater in PNET1 than PNET2 cells. The findings suggest that insulin effected neuronal differentiation and modulation of NTP gene expression in PNET cells utilizes a signal transduction cascade that requires tyrosyl phosphorylation of IRS-1.
95	NR	7526386	There is a 3-aa insertion in the transmembrane (TM) domain of the p68gag-ros protein-tyrosine kinase encoded by avian sarcoma virus UR2 v-ros as compared with that of the protooncogene c-ros. The effect of this insertion on biological function and biochemical properties of v-Ros protein was investigated by deleting these 3 aa to generate the mutant TM1. This mutant has greatly reduced transforming, mitogenic, and tumorigenic activities despite the fact that the protein-tyrosine kinase activity and cell-surface localization of TM1 protein are unaffected. However, unlike UR2 protein, mutant TM1 protein becomes glycosylated, is differentially phosphorylated, and fails to induce tyrosine phosphorylation of a 88-kDa protein and a major substrate of insulin receptor, insulin receptor substrate 1. The TM1 protein is unable to associate with phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and fails to promote association of insulin receptor substrate 1 with phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. By contrast, tyrosine phosphorylation of Shc protein and phospholipase C gamma as well as interaction of Grb2 protein with Shc and SOS protein signaling components are unaltered in the TM1 infected cells. Our results show that the TM-domain sequence of p68gag-ros profoundly affects its function and substrate interaction. The mutant defines a signaling pathway including phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, insulin receptor substrate 1, and possibly an 88-kDa protein that does not overlap the Ras pathway and is important for full transforming and mitogenic potency of v-ros protein-tyrosine kinase.
95	NR	7526037	BACKGROUND: Alcohol consumption during pregnancy often results in disorders of fetal development (Fetal Alcohol Syndrome). The brain appears to be particularly vulnerable, and alcohol abuse during pregnancy is probably the most common cause of acquired mental retardation. We therefore studied the in vitro effects of ethanol on insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1)-mediated proliferation of rat C6 glioblastoma cells. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The proliferation of C6 rat glioblastoma cells was measured in serum-free medium supplemented with specific growth factors in the presence or absence of ethanol. The effect of ethanol on IGF-1 receptor and insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) tyrosine phosphorylation was determined by immunoprecipitation and Western blotting, as was the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase content within IRS-1 immunoprecipitates. RESULTS: C6 cells grew slowly in serum-free medium and proliferated in response to IGF-1. Ethanol, at physiologically tolerated concentrations, markedly inhibited the growth of C6 cells in response to IGF-1, but had no effect on the proliferative rate in the presence of platelet-derived growth factor or 1% fetal bovine serum. Inhibition of cell proliferation was evident when ethanol was only present during a 1-hour pulse of IGF-1. Cell growth in the presence of IGF-2 was also prevented by ethanol. The inhibition of IGF-1-mediated cell proliferation was accompanied by abrogation of IGF-1 receptor tyrosine autophosphorylation. Ethanol also interfered with the IGF-1-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1, and the association of phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase with IRS-1. CONCLUSIONS: The data indicate that physiologically relevant concentrations of ethanol inhibit the responses of glial cells to IGF-1, including IGF-1 receptor autophosphorylation, IRS-1 and phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase activation, and cell growth.
95	NR	7524086	Although the insulin-dependent hydrolysis of glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol (GPI) may play an important role in insulin action, an absolute requirement for this glycolipid has not been demonstrated. Human K562 cells were mutated to produce a cell line (IA) incapable of the earliest step in PI glycosylation, the formation of PI-GlcNAc. Another cell line (IVD) was deficient in the deacetylation of PI-GlcNAc to form PI-GlcN and subsequent mannosylated species. Each line was transfected with wild-type human insulin receptors. Similar insulin-stimulated receptor autophosphorylation was observed in all three lines, along with a nearly identical increase in the association of phosphorylated insulin receptor substrate 1 with endogenous PI 3-kinase. Both normal and GPI-defective lines also displayed a similar 2- to 3-fold increase in phosphorylation of the Shc protein and its association with growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 in response to insulin. In contrast to these results, striking differences were noted in insulin-stimulated glycogen synthesis. In normal cells, glycogen synthesis was significantly increased by insulin, whereas no insulin stimulation was observed in GPI-deficient IA cells, and only a trace of stimulation was detected in IVD cells. These results indicate that tyrosine phosphorylation produced by insulin is not dependent on GPI synthesis, and this effect is not sufficient to elicit at least some of the metabolic effects of the hormone. In contrast, GPI synthesis is required for the stimulation of glycogen synthesis by insulin in these cells. These findings support the existence of divergent pathways in the action of insulin.
95	NR	7929151	The ErbB3 protein is a member of the ErbB subfamily of receptor protein tyrosine kinases. In the present study, the mechanism by which the ErbB3 protein is phosphorylated and the signal-transducing functions of this phosphorylated protein were investigated. When phosphorylated by the epidermal growth factor receptor in vitro, the ErbB3 protein strongly associated with the regulatory p85 subunit and the catalytic activity of phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3-kinase. The association of PI 3-kinase with ErbB3 in human breast cancer cells was found to be correlated with the constitutive phosphorylation of ErbB3 on tyrosine residues. In MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cells in which the ErbB3 protein is not constitutively phosphorylated, stimulation with epidermal growth factor led to the phosphorylation of ErbB3 on tyrosine residues and the formation of a functional signal transduction complex involving the ErbB3 protein and PI 3-kinase. These results suggest that the ErbB3 protein can be phosphorylated on tyrosine residues by a cross-phosphorylation mechanism and that the phosphorylated ErbB3 protein can couple other growth factor receptor protein tyrosine kinases to the PI 3-kinase pathway in a manner similar to the insulin receptor substrate 1 protein.
95	NR	7848909	Polypeptide growth factors including the insulin-like growth factors (IGFs), insulin, and transforming growth factor-alpha are mitogens for many breast cancer cell lines and may act as regulators of cancer cell growth. In a human breast cancer cell line MCF-7, which expresses IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR), stimulation with insulin or IGFs resulted in autophosphorylation of the IGF-IR in an increased proportion of ras bound to GTP and in the association of phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase (PI3K) activity and of p85-PI3K with M(r) 185,000 phosphotyrosinylated proteins corresponding in size to insulin/IGF-IR substrates. These events were associated with enhanced proliferation. MDA MB-468 is a human breast cancer cell line which expresses insulin receptor and high levels of epidermal growth factor/transforming growth factor alpha receptor but low levels of IGF-IR. In this cell line, insulin stimulated autophosphorylation of IR at physiological concentrations and promoted the association of PI3K activity and of p85 with phosphotyrosine-containing proteins. Insulin did not, however, induce increased ras.GTP, and the cells exhibited minimal proliferation in response to insulin. Unlike insulin treatment, epidermal growth factor stimulation of MDA MB-468 cells is mitogenic and resulted in increased ras.GTP content, suggesting that the failure of insulin to induce these changes is not due to alterations in these signaling molecules. We conclude that there is a postreceptor defect in insulin signaling in MDA MB-468 which prevents the activation of ras and the induction of mitogenesis. Activation of PI3K by insulin is not sufficient to mediate mitogenesis.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
95	NR	7734771	In view of the potent mitogenic effect exerted by insulin in human colonic cells, we used Caco-2 cells transfected with an activated (Val12) human Ha-ras gene or the polyoma middle T (PyMT) oncogene, a constitutive activator of pp60c-src tyrosine kinase activity, to investigate the effect of oncogenic p21ras and PyMT/pp60c-src on insulin mitogenic signaling. As compared to vector control Caco-2 cells, both oncogene-transfected cells exhibited: 1) a lost of response to insulin's stimulatory effect on mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase activity and cell proliferation, both of which were constitutively increased; 2) a decrease in insulin receptor (IR) affinity and insulin-stimulated exogenous tyrosine kinase activity, which resulted, at least in part, from increased protein kinase C (PKC) activity (4), since both IR alterations were partially corrected by PKC down-regulation; and 3) a decrease in both insulin receptor mRNA level and insulin receptor number, which was independent of PKC since it persisted after PKC down-regulation. In conclusion, oncogenic p21ras and PyMT/pp60c-src abolished insulin mitogenic signaling in Caco-2 cells through mechanisms involving (i) constitutive activation of MAP kinase, and (ii) marked decreases in both insulin receptor function and expression which were mediated by PKC-dependent and PKC-independent pathways respectively. This is the first evidence that, when oncogenically activated, p21ras and pp60c-src not only exert a negative control on insulin receptor function but also repress insulin receptor gene expression in human colonic cells.
95	NR	7523453	Insulin resistance is an important metabolic abnormality often associated with infections, cancer, obesity, and especially non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM). We have previously demonstrated that tumor necrosis factor-alpha produced by adipose tissue is a key mediator of insulin resistance in animal models of obesity-diabetes. However, the mechanism by which TNF-alpha interferes with insulin action is not known. Since a defective insulin receptor (IR) tyrosine kinase activity has been observed in obesity and NIDDM, we measured the IR tyrosine kinase activity in the Zucker (fa/fa) rat model of obesity and insulin resistance after neutralizing TNF-alpha with a soluble TNF receptor (TNFR)-lgG fusion protein. This neutralization resulted in a marked increase in insulin-stimulated autophosphorylation of the IR, as well as phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) in muscle and fat tissues of the fa/fa rats, restoring them to near control (lean) levels. In contrast, no significant changes were observed in insulin-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylations of IR and IRS-1 in liver. The physiological significance of the improvements in IR signaling was indicated by a concurrent reduction in plasma glucose, insulin, and free fatty acid levels. These results demonstrate that TNF-alpha participates in obesity-related systemic insulin resistance by inhibiting the IR tyrosine kinase in the two tissues mainly responsible for insulin-stimulated glucose uptake: muscle and fat.
95	NR	8076365	To investigate the expression and subcellular distribution of insulin receptor substrate-1 in hepatocytes, which are major targets of insulin along with muscle and adipose tissue, we obtained monoclonal antibodies by immunizing mice with a fusion protein consisting of the C-terminal portion of the human insulin receptor substrate-1 and glutathione-S-transferase. Two of the monoclonal antibodies (designated as 7B3 and 6G5) were found to be useful for immunohistochemical studies. Using 6G5 we demonstrate a high level of expression of insulin receptor substrate-1 in liver cirrhosis hepatocytes and variable expression in hepatocellular carcinoma cells. These results suggest that insulin receptor substrate-1 may play a role in liver regeneration during cirrhosis and that an insulin signaling cascade may be involved in hepatocarcinogenesis.
95	NR	7953556	BACKGROUND: Stimulation of phaeochromocytoma PC12 cells by nerve growth factor leads to growth arrest and neuronal differentiation, whereas insulin induces various metabolic responses such as metabolism of glucose and lipids. Moreover, both insulin and epidermal growth factor stimulate the proliferation of PC12 cells. In spite of their different biological effects, nerve growth factor, insulin and epidermal growth factor induce very similar early responses in PC12 cells. Stimulation with nerve growth factor leads to the sustained activation and nuclear translocation of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase. By contrast, both insulin and epidermal growth factor induce the transient activation of MAP kinase, without pronounced nuclear translocation of the enzyme. We have investigated whether the differential activation of signaling pathway components can account for the distinct cellular responses to these different growth factors. RESULTS: By overexpressing insulin receptors in PC12 cells, we observed insulin-dependent neurite outgrowth, similar to that induced by nerve growth factor in both non-transfected and overexpressing cells. Overexpression of insulin receptors in PC12 cells leads to a more pronounced, but similar pattern of insulin-induced tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins in PC12 cells, including enhanced recruitment of Grb2/Sos into a complex with either Shc or IRS1. MAP kinase activation in response to insulin stimulation of cells overexpressing the insulin receptor is similar to MAP kinase activation in response to NGF stimulation of parental or overexpressing PC12 cells: the activation is prolonged and nuclear translocation of the enzyme occurs. CONCLUSION: The differential subcellular localization and duration of MAP kinase activation induced by insulin and NGF may explain the difference in the biological actions of these two factors on PC12 cells. Our results show that the strength of the signal generated by a receptor with tyrosine kinase activity can influence the downstream signaling pathway, leading to cell differentiation instead of cell proliferation.
95	NR	8034618	Taking advantage of the potent mitogenic effect exerted by insulin in human colonic cells, we used Caco-2 cells transfected with an activated (Val-12) human Haras gene or the polyoma middle T (PyMT) oncogene, a constitutive activator of pp60c-src tyrosine kinase activity, to investigate the effect of oncogenic p21ras and PyMT/pp60c-src on insulin mitogenic signaling. As compared to vector control Caco-2 cells, both oncogene-transfected cells exhibited: 1) a loss of response to insulin's stimulatory effect on mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase activity and cell proliferation, both of which were constitutively increased; 2) a decrease in insulin receptor (IR) affinity and insulin-stimulated exogenous tyrosine kinase activity, which resulted from increased protein kinase C (PKC) activity (Delage, S., Chastre, E., Empereur, S., Wicek, D., Veissiere, D., Capeau, J., Gespach, C., and Cherqui, G. (1993) Cancer Res. 53, 2762-2770), since IR alterations were corrected by PKC down-regulation; and 3) a decrease in both IR mRNA level and IR number, which was independent of PKC since it persisted after PKC down-regulation. In conclusion, this is the first evidence that oncogenic p21ras and PyMT/pp60c-src abolish insulin mitogenic signaling in human colonic cells through mechanisms involving (i) constitutive activation of MAP kinase and (ii) marked decreases in both IR function and expression which are mediated by PKC-dependent and PKC-independent pathways, respectively.
95	NR	8013752	The insulin receptor is a growth regulator present on the surface of most cells that transmits a mitogenic signal in response to insulin. Thus, the gene for the insulin receptor is constitutively expressed at low levels in all cells. We characterize a constitutive enhancer element that is present in the proximal promoter of the human insulin receptor gene. We have localized the enhancer to a 26-base-pair (26-bp) sequence from -528 to -503. When this sequence is inserted into the proximal promoter, a three- to fourfold increase in promoter activity is observed, and when two copies are inserted, a five- to sixfold increase is seen. Electrophoretic mobility shift analysis demonstrates that nuclear factors binding to this sequence are found in many different cell types. At least two proteins with different specificities bind within this 26-bp sequence. The identity of the predominant binding protein is Sp1, because an oligonucleotide composed of an Sp1 consensus binding sequence can compete for several of the DNA-protein complexes. In addition, we demonstrate that purified Sp1 can bind to the 26-bp oligonucleotide and that this complex comigrates with a DNA-protein complex formed with a HeLa nuclear extract. Finally, an antibody to human Sp1 protein is able to bind to the enhancer DNA/HeLa protein complex and supershift this complex. These findings suggest that this sequence corresponds to a general element that may contribute to the ubiquitous expression of the human insulin receptor gene.
95	NR	8205537	While IGF-1 plays a role in early B-cell development, little is known of insulin and insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) action in post-marrow B-cells. Recently, our laboratory demonstrated that mouse and human multiple myeloma (MM) cell lines possess functional insulin receptors (IRs) and IGF-1 receptors (IGF-1Rs). In this study, we show that responsiveness to insulin and IGF-1 is more developed in human MM cell lines than in human B-lymphoblastoid cell lines. Two human MM cell lines (U266 and RPMI 8226) were compared to three B-lymphoblastoid cell lines [Epstein-Barr virus immortalized B-cells (EBV), a Burkitt lymphoma cell line (Ramos), and a non-EBV lymphoblastoid cell line (HS Sultan)]. Surface IR and IGF-1R expression, measured by flow cytometry, demonstrated that the MM cell lines expressed more IRs and IGF-1Rs than did the EBV, Ramos, or HS Sultan cell lines. In vitro receptor kinase activity of affinity-purified receptors showed that the MM cells had more phosphorylated receptors than did the EBV, Ramos, or HS Sultan cells. Intracellular receptor signaling was also markedly different between the two cell groups. Whole cell phosphorylation studies showed that MM cells possessed not only hormone-dependent receptor autophosphorylation (M(r) 97,000) but also substrate phosphorylation (M(r) 185,000; 60,000). The lymphoblastoid cells, while demonstrating receptor autophosphorylation (IR autophosphorylation in the EBV cell line at 200 nM hormone was similar to MM receptor phosphorylation at 2 nM), lacked hormone-responsive substrates. The MM cell lines contained significantly more hormone-stimulated phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase) activity than the B-lymphoblastoid cell lines. In the MM cells, PI 3-kinase was activated by at least 10-fold, but, in the B-lymphoblastoid cell lines, it was activated by no more than 2-fold. Hormone-responsive glucose metabolism was also greater in the MM cell lines. In the U266 cells, insulin increased lactate production 62 +/- 9 and 101 +/- 12% (mean +/- SE) at concentrations of 2 nM and 200 nM, respectively. IGF-1 produced 72 +/- 9 and 99 +/- 13% increases at similar concentrations. In the 8226 cells, insulin increased lactate production 4 +/- 4 and 36 +/- 15% at 2 and 200 nM, respectively. IGF-1 produced a 13 +/- 6 and 70 +/- 18% increase. In the EBV and Ramos cells, neither hormone increased lactate production by more than 10 +/- 3%.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)
95	NR	8010967	An immortalized cell line, called P9, was derived from hepatocytes by transfection with SV40 DNA. These cells expressed enzyme activities characteristic of hepatocytes, namely glucose-6-phosphatase, glycogen phosphorylase, bilirubin glucuronyltransferase and both glucagon- and prostaglandin E1 (PGE1)-stimulated adenylate cyclase activities, albeit at decreased levels compared with native hepatocytes. Levels of the G-protein subunits alpha-Gi-2, alpha-Gi-3, G beta and the 'long' form of alpha-G2 (45 kDa) were approximately 4-fold higher relative to native hepatocytes, whereas those of the 'short' form of alpha-G2 (42 kDa) were lower by approximately 40%. Associated with this were marked alterations in the guanine nucleotide regulation of adenylate cyclase. Receptor-mediated stimulation, achieved by either PGE1 or glucagon, was apparent in P9 cells, although the latter was only evident upon amplification with forskolin. Glucagon-stimulated cyclic AMP accumulation in P9 cells did not exhibit desensitization, as in hepatocytes, nor was the phosphorylation of alpha-Gi-2 evident. Culture of P9 cells with insulin led to a dose-dependent decrease (EC50 0.2 +/- 0.1 nM) in the ability of PGE1 to stimulate adenylate cyclase activity, with the maximum effect attained after approximately 6 h. A comparable attenuation of stimulation was seen for glucagon- and guanine-nucleotide-stimulated adenylate cyclase activities. In cells cultured with insulin, lower levels of GTP were required to stimulate adenylate cyclase, ADP-ribosylation of the 45 kDa form of alpha-Gs with cholera toxin was attenuated, and the expression of both alpha Gi-2 and alpha-Gi-3 was increased. It is suggested that the expression of alpha-Gi-2 and alpha-Gi-3 may be directly regulated by the action of insulin in hepatocytes and P9 cells.
95	NR	8188769	The role of intracellular pH (pHin) in the regulation of cell growth in both normal and transformed cells is a topic of considerable controversy. In an effort to study this relationship NIH 3T3 cells were stably transfected with the gene for the yeast H(+)-ATPase, constitutively elevating their pHin. The resulting cell line, RN1a, has a transformed phenotype: The cells are serum independent for growth, clone in soft agar, and form tumors in nude mice. In the present study, we further characterize this system in order to understand how transfection with this proton pump leads to serum-independent growth, using defined media to investigate the effects of specific growth factors on the transfected and parental NIH 3T3 cells. While both cell lines show similar growth increases in response to platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-BB and epidermal growth factor (EGF), they respond differently to insulin, insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) and PDGF-AA. RN1a cells exhibit increased growth at nanomolar concentrations of insulin but the parental cells had only a relatively minor response to insulin at 10 microM. Both cell lines showed some response to IGF-I in the nanomolar range but the response of RN1a cells was much larger. Differences in insulin and IGF-I receptor number alone could not explain these results. The two cell lines also respond differently to PDGF-AA. RN1a cells are relatively insensitive to stimulation by PDGF-AA and express fewer PDGF alpha receptors as shown by Northern blots and receptor-binding studies. We propose a unifying hypothesis in which the H(+)-ATPase activates a downstream element in the PDGF-AA signal transduction pathway that complements insulin and IGF-I signals, while leading to downregulation of the PDGF alpha receptor.
95	NR	8197147	Insulin resistance is a common problem associated with infections and cancer and, most importantly, is the central component of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. We have recently shown that tumor necrosis factor (TNF) alpha is a key mediator of insulin resistance in animal models of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Here, we investigate how TNF-alpha interferes with insulin action. Chronic exposure of adipocytes to low concentrations of TNF-alpha strongly inhibits insulin-stimulated glucose uptake. Concurrently, TNF-alpha treatment causes a moderate decrease in the insulin-stimulated autophosphorylation of the insulin receptor (IR) and a dramatic decrease in the phosphorylation of IR substrate 1, the major substrate of the IR in vivo. The IR isolated from TNF-alpha-treated cells is also defective in the ability to autophosphorylate and phosphorylate IR substrate 1 in vitro. These results show that TNF-alpha directly interferes with the signaling of insulin through its receptor and consequently blocks biological actions of insulin.
95	NR	8146197	The T-cell antigen CD28 provides a costimulatory signal that is required for T-cell proliferation. T-cell receptor zeta/CD3 engagement without CD28 ligation leads to a state of nonresponsiveness/anergy, thereby implicating CD28 in the control of peripheral tolerance to foreign antigens or tumors. A key unresolved question has concerned the mechanism by which CD28 generates intracellular signals. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase) is a lipid kinase with Src-homology 2 (SH2) domain(s) that binds to the platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGF-R), an interaction that is essential for signaling by growth factor. In this study, we demonstrate that CD28 binds to PI 3-kinase by means of a Y(P)MXM motif within its cytoplasmic tail. CD28-associated PI 3-kinase was detected by lipid kinase and HPLC analysis as well as by reconstitution experiments with baculoviral-expressed p85 subunit of PI 3-kinase. CD28 bound directly to the p85 subunit without the need for the associated p110 subunit. Site-directed mutagenesis and peptide competition analysis using Y(P)-MXM-containing peptides showed that PI 3-kinase bound to a Y(P)MXM motif within the CD28 cytoplasmic tail (residues 191-194). Mutation of the Y191 within the motif resulted in a complete loss of binding, while mutation of M194 caused partial loss of binding. Binding analysis showed that the CD28 Y(P)-MXM motif bound to the p85 C- and N-terminal SH2 domains with an affinity comparable to that observed for PDGF-R and insulin receptor substrate 1. In terms of signaling, CD28 ligation induced a dramatic increase in the recruitment and association of PI 3-kinase with the receptor. CD28 is likely to use PI 3-kinase as the second signal leading to T-cell proliferation, an event with implications for anergy and peripheral T-cell tolerance.
95	NR	8122112	The 2;5 chromosomal translocation occurs in most anaplastic large-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphomas arising from activated T lymphocytes. This rearrangement was shown to fuse the NPM nucleolar phosphoprotein gene on chromosome 5q35 to a previously unidentified protein tyrosine kinase gene, ALK, on chromosome 2p23. In the predicted hybrid protein, the amino terminus of nucleophosmin (NPM) is linked to the catalytic domain of anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK). Expressed in the small intestine, testis, and brain but not in normal lymphoid cells, ALK shows greatest sequence similarity to the insulin receptor subfamily of kinases. Unscheduled expression of the truncated ALK may contribute to malignant transformation in these lymphomas.
95	NR	8117746	From the soluble protein fraction of lactating rat mammary epithelial cells, fatty acid-binding protein (FABP) was isolated by immunoaffinity chromatography. After digestion with trypsin, peptides were characterized with time-of-flight mass spectrometry and revealed identity with corresponding peptides derived from the heart-type FABP isolated from rat heart. In addition, by electrospray mass spectrometry the molecular mass has been determined to 14683.9 +/- 3 Da, further corroborating the identity. The content of FABP in mammary glands from virgin, pregnant and lactating rats was evaluated using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and a FABP-specific immunosorbent assay. In the two-dimensional gels FABP was the apparently most abundant cytosolic protein in mammary epithelial cells from rats in late pregnancy as well as from lactating rats. The content of FABP was 59 +/- 19 microgram/mg (n = 11) of soluble proteins from the fully differentiated lactating mammary gland as determined by ELISA. This value represented an 80-fold increase compared with the FABP content of mammary gland from virgin rats, and is comparable with the level found in rat heart. Upon stimulation with insulin a small fraction of FABP was phosphorylated in lactating mammary epithelial cells. In conclusion, these findings indicate that the FABPs from rat mammary gland and heart are identical and further suggest that in mammary gland this FABP may play a role in signal transduction downstream from the insulin receptor.
95	NR	8015549	We have studied insulin and antireceptor antibody binding to mutated human insulin receptors deleted of residues 485-599 in the alpha-subunit by site-directed mutagenesis. Both normal and mutated receptors were expressed in rat HTC hepatoma cells. Cells expressing either the normal receptor or the mutated receptor retained the ability to bind insulin. In contrast to the normal receptor, however, the mutated receptor failed to interact with antireceptor alpha-subunit antibodies. The inability of the mutated receptor to interact with various antireceptor antibodies was further documented by photoaffinity labeling studies. In intact HTC cells expressing mutated receptors, basal insulin receptor tyrosine autophosphorylation was 2-fold elevated when compared to cells expressing normal receptors. In these cells, however, the response of this function to insulin was blunted. When receptors were isolated from these cells and assayed for both autophosphorylation and phosphotransferase activities toward the synthetic substrate poly(Glu, Tyr), the response to insulin was also blunted. To study the ability of the mutated receptor to transmembrane signal, insulin stimulation of S6 kinase activity was measured. In cells with mutated receptors, in concert with the insulin receptor kinase data, basal S6 kinase activity was elevated, and the response to insulin was blunted. The data suggest, therefore, that residues 485-599 in the alpha-subunit of the insulin receptor are critical for antireceptor antibody binding, but not for insulin binding. Moreover, these data suggest that residues 485-599 contain a regulatory domain for insulin regulation of receptor beta-subunit functions.
96	NR	14674679	Excessive proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) is a critical element in the development of several vascular pathologies, particularly in atherosclerosis and in restenosis due to angioplasty. We have shown that butyrate, a powerful antiproliferative agent, a strong promoter of cell differentiation and an inducer of apoptosis inhibits VSMC proliferation at physiological concentrations with no cytotoxicity. In the present study, we have used cDNA array technology to unravel the molecular basis of the antiproliferative effect of butyrate on VSMCs. To assess the involvement of gene expression in butyrate-inhibited VSMC proliferation, proliferating VSMCs were exposed to 5 mmol/l butyrate 1 through 5 days after plating. Expression profiles of 1.176 genes representing different functional classes in untreated control and butyrate treated VSMCs were compared. A total of 111 genes exhibiting moderate (2.0-5.0 fold) to strong (> 5.0 fold) differential expression were identified. Analysis of these genes indicates that butyrate treatment mainly alters the expression of four different functional classes of genes, which include: 43 genes implicated in cell growth and differentiation, 13 genes related to stress response, 11 genes associated with vascular function and 8 genes normally present in neuronal cells. Examination of differentially expressed cell growth and differentiation related genes indicate that butyrate-inhibited VSMC proliferation appears to involve down-regulation of genes that encode several positive regulators of cell growth and up-regulation of some negative regulators of growth or differentiation inducers. Some of the down-regulated genes include proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), retinoblastoma susceptibility related protein p130 (pRb), cell division control protein 2 homolog (cdc2), cyclin B1, cell division control protein 20 homolog (p55cdc), high mobility group (HMG) 1 and 2 and several others. Whereas the up-regulated genes include cyclin D1, p21WAF1, p141NK4B/p15INK5B, Clusterin, inhibitor of DNA binding 1 (ID1) and others. On the other hand, butyrate-responsive stress-related genes include some of the members of heat shock protein (HSP), glutathione-s-transferase (GST), glutathione peroxidase (GSH-PXs) and cytochrome P450 (CYP) families. Additionally, several genes related to vascular and neuronal function are also responsive to butyrate treatment. Although involvement of genes that encode stress response, vascular and neuronal functional proteins in cell proliferation is not clear, cDNA expression array data appear to suggest that they may play a role in the regulation of cell proliferation. However, cDNA expression profiles indicate that butyrate-inhibited VSMC proliferation involves combined action of a proportionally large number of both positive and negative regulators of growth, which ultimately causes growth arrest of VSMCs. Furthermore, these butyrate-induced differential gene expression changes are not only consistent with the antiproliferative effect of butyrate but are also in agreement with the roles that these gene products play in cell proliferation.
96	NR	14672558	Using atomic force microscopy (AFM), the dynamic process of the in vitro nucleosome reconstitution followed by slow dilution from high salt to low salt was visualized. Data showed that the histone octamers were dissociated from DNA at 1M NaCl. When the salt concentration was slowly reduced to 650 mM and 300 mM, the core histones bound to the naked DNA gradually. Once the salt concentration was reduced to 50 mM the classic "beads-on-a-string" structure was clearly visualized. Furthermore, using the technique of the in vitro reconstitution of nucleosome, the mono- and di- nucleosomes were assembled in vitro with both HS2core (-10681 to -10970 bp) and NCR2 (-372 to -194 bp) DNA sequences in the 5 flanking sequence of human b-globin gene. Data revealed that HMG 1/2 and HMG14/17 proteins binding to both DNA sequences are changeable following the assembly and disassembly of nucleosomes. We suggest that the changeable binding patterns of HMG 14/17 and HMG1/2 proteins with these regulatory elements may be critical in the process of nucleosome assembly, recruitment of chromatin-modifying activities, and the regulation of human b-globin gene expression.
96	NR	14653518	The sterol pathway in Candida albicans is the target for several classes of antifungal drugs. Intermediates in the sterol pathway are involved in ergosterol synthesis, prenylation and dolichol synthesis. This study examines gene expression of the sterol pathway in response to lovastatin, an inhibitor of HMG-CoA reductase (Hmg1p), and fluconazole, an inhibitor of 14 alpha-lanosterol demethylase (Erg11p). Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) studies indicated that lovastatin acts synergistically with fluconazole in vitro. Semi-quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) results indicated that genes in the early part of the sterol pathway, such as HMG1 and ERG20, did not alter expression in the presence of both lovastatin and fluconazole, whereas genes in the later part of the sterol pathway, such as ERG9 and ERG11, had increased expression in response to these drugs in mid-logarithmic growth. Genes involved in prenylation, such as RAM1 and RAM2, also respond to these drugs in mid-logarithmic growth, although another prenylation gene, CDC43, was not affected. After 24 h of growth, the relative expression of ERG20, ERG9, and ERG11 remained unchanged or increased in the presence of both drugs, while all other genes decreased in expression under all drug treatments.
96	NR	14630716	Nitric oxide, generated by the inducible form of nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), is a potential mediator of cytokine-induced beta-cell dysfunction in type 1 diabetes mellitus. We have previously shown that cytokine-induced iNOS expression is cycloheximide (CHX) sensitive and requires nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappa B) activation. In the present study, we show that an octamer motif located 20 bp downstream of the proximal NF-kappa B binding site in the rat iNOS promoter is critical for IL-1 beta and interferon-gamma induction of promoter activity in rat primary beta-cells and insulin-producing RINm5F cells. In gel shift assays, the octamer motif bound constitutively the transcription factor Oct1. Neither Oct1 nor NF-kappa B binding activities were blocked by CHX, suggesting that other factor(s) synthesized in response to IL-1 beta contribute to iNOS promoter induction. The high mobility group (HMG)-I(Y) protein also bound the proximal iNOS promoter region. HMG-I(Y) binding was decreased in cells treated with CHX and HMG-I(Y) silencing by RNA interference reduced IL-1 beta-induced iNOS promoter activity. These results suggest that Oct1, NF-kappa B, and HMG-I(Y) cooperate for transactivation of the iNOS promoter in pancreatic beta-cells.
96	NR	14602903	The structure-pharmacological activity relationships generally accepted for antitumor platinum compounds stressed the necessity for the cis-[PtX(2)(amine)(2)] structure while the trans-[PtX(2)(amine)(2)] structure was considered inactive. However, more recently, several trans-platinum complexes have been identified which are potently toxic, antitumor-active and demonstrate activity distinct from that of conventional cisplatin (cis-[PtCl(2)(NH(3))(2)]). We have shown in the previous report that the replacement of ammine ligands by iminoether in transplatin (trans-[PtCl(2)(NH(3))(2)]) results in a marked enhancement of its cytotoxicity so that it is more cytotoxic than its cis congener and exhibits significant antitumor activity, including activity in cisplatin-resistant tumor cells. In addition, we have also shown previously that this new trans compound (trans-[PtCl(2)(E-iminoether)(2)]) forms mainly monofunctional adducts at guanine residues on DNA, which is generally accepted to be the cellular target of platinum drugs. In order to shed light on the mechanism underlying the antitumor activity of trans-[PtCl(2)(E-iminoether)(2)] we examined oligodeoxyribonucleotide duplexes containing a single, site-specific, monofunctional adduct of this transplatin analog by the methods of molecular biophysics. The results indicate that major monofunctional adducts of trans-[PtCl(2)(E-iminoether)(2)] locally distort DNA, bend the DNA axis by 21 degrees toward the minor groove, are not recognized by HMGB1 proteins and are readily removed from DNA by nucleotide excision repair (NER). In addition, the monofunctional adducts of trans-[PtCl(2)(E-iminoether)(2)] readily cross-link proteins, which markedly enhances the efficiency of this adduct to terminate DNA polymerization by DNA polymerases in vitro and to inhibit removal of this adduct from DNA by NER. It is suggested that DNA-protein ternary cross-links produced by trans-[PtCl(2)(E-iminoether)(2)] could persist considerably longer than the non-cross-linked monofunctional adducts, which would potentiate toxicity of this antitumor platinum compound toward tumor cells sensitive to this drug. Thus, trans-[PtCl(2)(E-iminoether)(2)] represents a quite new class of platinum antitumor drugs in which activation of trans geometry is associated with an increased efficiency to form DNA-protein ternary cross-links thereby acting by a different mechanism from 'classical' cisplatin and its analogs.
96	NR	14534709	Amphoterin, the major product of the high mobility group-1 gene, is a ligand associated with cancer invasion and metastasis through activation of the receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE). Expression of amphoterin and RAGE was examined in prostatectomy specimens from 40 patients with pT3 prostate cancer (18 non-metastatic and 22 metastatic) preoperatively treated with lutenizing hormone-releasing hormone (LH-RH) agonist. Amphoterin expression was detected in tumor cells of 6 (27%) metastatic and 0 non-metastatic cases (p<0.0001). Amphoterin was also detected in prostatic stromal cells of 14 (63%) metastatic cases and 2 (11%) non-metastatic cases (p=0.0010). RAGE production was detected in cancer cells of 16 (73%) metastatic and 6 (33%) non-metastatic cases (p=0.0244). A total of 2 (22%) non-metastatic and 16 (73%) metastatic cases showed co-expression of amphoterin and RAGE in tumor cells or in tumor cells and stromal cells (p=0.0001). The in vitro invasive capacity of PC-3, a prostatic cancer cell line that co-expressed amphoterin and RAGE, was suppressed by treatment with amphoterin antisense S-oligodeoxynucleotide (ODN). Primary cultured human prostatic stromal cells secreted no amphoterin; however, amphoterin secretion was induced by androgen deprivation. The conditioned medium of human prostatic stromal cells deprived of androgen recovered the in vitro invasive capacity of PC-3 cells suppressed by amphoterin antisense S-ODN. These results suggest that androgen deprivation provides a paracrine interaction between cancer and stromal cells through the RAGE-amphoterin system in advanced prostate cancer.
96	NR	12956418	Two groups of plant chromatin-associated high mobility group (HMG) proteins, namely the HMGA family, typically containing four A/T-hook DNA-binding motifs, and the HMGB family, containing a single HMG-box DNA-binding domain, have been identified. We have examined the interaction of recombinant maize HMGA and five different HMGB proteins with mononucleosomes (containing approx. 165 bp of DNA) purified from micrococcal nuclease-digested maize chromatin. The HMGB proteins interacted with the nucleosomes independent of the presence of the linker histone H1, while the binding of HMGA in the presence of H1 differed from that observed in the absence of H1. HMGA and the HMGB proteins bound H1-containing nucleosome particles with similar affinity. The plant HMG proteins could also bind nucleosomes that were briefly treated with trypsin (removing the N-terminal domains of the core histones), suggesting that the histone N-termini are dispensable for HMG protein binding. In the presence of untreated nucleosomes and trypsinised nucleosomes, HMGB1 could be chemically crosslinked with a core histone, which indicates that the trypsin-resistant part of the histones within the nucleosome is the main interaction partner of HMGB1 rather than the histone N-termini. In conclusion, these results indicate that specific nucleosome binding of the plant HMGB proteins requires simultaneous DNA and histone contacts.
96	NR	12925773	High mobility group box (HMGB) 1 and 2 are two abundant nonhistone nuclear proteins that have been found in association with chromatin. Previous studies based on immunofluorescence analysis indicated that HMGB1 dissociates from chromosomes during mitosis. In the present work, HMGB1 and 2 subcellular localization was reinvestigated in living cells by using enhanced green fluorescent protein- and Discosome sp. red fluorescent protein-tagged proteins. Contrary to previous reports, HMGB1 and 2 were shown to be present under two forms in mitotic cells, i.e., free and associated with the condensed chromatin, which rapidly exchange. A detailed analysis of HMGB2 interaction with mitotic chromosomes indicated that two sites encompassing HMG-box A and B are responsible for binding. Importantly, this interaction was rapidly inactivated when cells were permeabilized or exposed to chemical fixatives that are widely used in immunodetection techniques. A comparable behavior was also observed for two proteins of the HMG-nucleosome binding (HMGN) group, namely, HMGN1 and HMGN2.
96	NR	12920489	The NK gene complex (NKC) controls murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV) immunity through Cmv1-dependent natural killer (NK) cell responses. Ly49H expression correlates with Cmv1 phenotypes in different inbred strains, is required for MCMV resistance in C57BL/6 (B6) mice, and its interaction with the MCMV encoded m157 protein leads to NK cell-mediated destruction of virus-infected cells. However, genetic mapping studies have previously indicated that Cmv1 should reside in the D6Wum9-16 NKC interval, distal to Ly49h. Since these data suggested that multiple NKC-linked loci could regulate viral immunity, a putative MCMV resistance control ( Mrc) locus was pinpointed to within the D6Wum9-16 interval on a NKC-aligned bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC). Sequence analysis of BAC 151 revealed several novel G-protein coupled receptor genes, an HMG-1 remnant and many additional polymorphic microsatellites that were useful in determining the minimal genetic interval for the Mrc locus. Moreover, comparison of B6, BALB/c, A/J and recombinant Mrc alleles restricted the genetic interval to approximately 470 bp and showed that it was also a hotspot for recombination. MCMV challenge of novel NKC recombinant mice demonstrated that Mrc(B6) was not required for MCMV resistance nor could it directly complement the Ly49(BALB) haplotype to rescue MCMV susceptibility. Taken together, these data show that while Mrc apparently guides recombination, Ly49H expression is sufficient for MCMV resistance in B6 mice. A direct role for Mrc(B6) in virus resistance is excluded in the novel mice.
96	NR	12909345	We isolated a 918 bp long full-length rice HMGB1 cDNA, which has an open reading frame of 471 bp encoding 157 amino acids, with a central domain of high sequence similarity to the HMG-box domain of other plant HMGB1 proteins. RNA gel blot analysis indicated that rice HMGB1 gene is constitutively expressed in various tissues and organs. Southern hybridization and sequence analyses suggested that a single copy of the HMGB1 gene composed of seven exons and six introns exists in rice. We have also cloned a 1755 bp long 5' flanking region of the rice HMGB1 gene, which can be regarded as its promoter. 5' deletion analysis of this promoter indicated that positive cis-elements residing between -1400 and -1115 are important to enhance quantitative expression, whereas negative cis-elements between -1755 and -1400 and between -1115 and -351 inhibit expression.
96	NR	12882679	NA
96	NR	12799451	p53 function is modulated by several covalent and non-covalent modifiers. The architectural DNA- binding protein, High Mobility Group protein B-1 is a unique activator of p53. HMGB-1 protein is structured into two HMG-box domains, namely A-box and B-box, connected to a long highly acidic C-terminal domain. Here we report that both the C-terminal domain and A-box of HMGB-1 are critical for stimulation of p53-mediated DNA binding to its cognate site. Though deletion of these domains showed minimal effect in activation of p53-mediated transcription from the DNA template as compared to full-length HMGB-1, truncation of both the domains indeed showed significant reduction of transcriptional activation from the chromatin template as observed in DNA binding. Using transient transfection assays we showed that the C-terminal acidic domain and A-box of HMGB-1 are critical for the enhancement of the p53-mediated transactivation in vivo. Furthermore, the C-terminal domain and A-box deleted HMGB-1 could not activate p53-dependent apoptosis above the basal level. In conclusion, these results elucidate the role of acidic C-terminal domain and A-box of HMGB-1 in p53-mediated transcriptional activation and its further downstream effect.
96	NR	12761302	The protein DSP1 belongs to the group of HMG-box proteins, which share the common structural feature of the HMG-box. This approximately 80 amino acid long motif binds DNA via the minor groove. DSP1 was discovered as a transcriptional co-repressor of Dorsal in Drosophila melanogaster and then was shown to participate to the remodeling of chromatin. By means of sequence alignment and gene organization, DSP1 was classified as the fly homologue of the vertebrate proteins HMGB1/2. DSP1 contains two HMG boxes flanked by two glutamine-rich domains at the N-terminus. In addition, the HMG domain of DSP1 displays two differences in its primary sequence as compared to the vertebrate HMGB1: a shorter acidic tail and a linker between the two boxes longer by 6 amino acids. By comparing several functional parameters of DSP1 with those of HMGB1, the present study establishes the functional equivalence of both proteins in terms of DNA recognition. The major structural difference between the two proteins, the glutamine-rich N-terminal tail of DSP1, which does not exist in HMGB1, did not interfere with any of the studied DNA-binding properties of the proteins.
96	NR	12727900	Retroposed copies (RPCs) of genes are functional (intronless paralogs) or nonfunctional (processed pseudogenes) copies derived from mRNA through a process of retrotransposition. Previous studies found that gene families involved in mRNA translation or nuclear function were more likely to have large numbers of RPCs. Here we characterize RPCs of the few families coding for the abundant high-mobility-group (HMG) proteins in humans. Using an algorithm we developed, we identified and studied 219 HMG RPCs. For slightly more than 10% of these RPCs, we found evidence indicating expression. Furthermore, eight of these are potentially new members of the HMG families of proteins. For three RPCs, the evidence indicated expression as part of other transcripts; in all of these, we found the presence of alternative splicing or multiple polyadenylation signals. RPC distribution among the HMGs was not even, with 33-65 each for HMGB1, HMGB3, HMGN1, and HMGN2, and 0-6 each for HMGA1, HMGA2, HMGB2, and HMGN3. Analysis of the sequences flanking the RPCs revealed that the junction between the target site duplications and the 5'-flanking sequences exhibited the same TT/AAAA consensus found for the L1 endonuclease, supporting an L1-mediated retrotransposition mechanism. Finally, because our algorithm included aligning RPC flanking sequences with the corresponding HMG genomic sequence, we were able to identify transcribed regions of HMG genes that were not part of the published mRNA sequences.
96	NR	12653554	In plants, a variety of chromatin-associated high mobility group (HMG) proteins belonging to the HMGB family have been identified. We have examined the phosphorylation of the HMGB proteins from the monocotyledonous plant maize and the dicotyledonous plant Arabidopsis by protein kinase CK2alpha. Maize CK2alpha phosphorylates the maize HMGB1 and HMGB2/3 proteins and the Arabidopsis HMGB1, HMGB2/3, and HMGB4 proteins. Maize HMGB4 and HMGB5 and Arabidopsis HMGB5 are not phosphorylated by CK2alpha. Depending on the HMGB protein up to five amino acid residues are phosphorylated in the course of the phosphorylation reaction. The HMGB1 proteins from both plants are markedly more slowly phosphorylated by CK2alpha than the other HMGB substrate proteins, indicating that certain HMGB proteins are clearly preferred substrates for CK2alpha. The rate of the phosphorylation reaction appears to be related to the ease of interaction between CK2alpha and the HMGB proteins, as indicated by chemical cross-linking experiments. MALDI/TOF mass spectrometry analyses demonstrate that the HMGB1 and HMGB2/3 proteins occur in various phosphorylation states in immature maize kernels. Thus, HMGB1 exists as monophosphorylated, double-phosphorylated, triple-phosphorylated, and tetraphosphorylated protein in kernel tissue, and the tetraphosphorylated form is the most abundant version. The observed in vivo phosphorylation states indicate that protein kinase(s) other than CK2alpha contribute(s) to the modification of the plant HMGB proteins. The fact that the HMGB proteins are phosphorylated to various extents reveals that the existence of differentially modified forms increases the number of distinct HMGB protein variants in plant chromatin that may be adapted to certain functions.
96	NR	12645872	Nuclei from Plodia interpunctella larvae contain four major proteins, which are extracted by 5% perchloric acid and 0.35 M NaCl. The proteins have been designated PL1, PL2, PL3, and PL4. The amino acid analyses of these proteins show that they have high proportions of acidic and basic amino acid residues, a property characteristic of the high mobility group (HMG) proteins isolated from vertebrate tissues. Immunological characterication of these proteins clearly shows that PL1, PL2, and PL4 are more closely related to HMG1 dipteran proteins, while PL3 is more closely related to HMG1 dipteran proteins. The possible relatedness of these proteins to HMG proteins is discussed.
96	NR	12640122	Most 5-methylcytosine in Neurospora crassa occurs in A:T-rich sequences high in TpA dinucleotides, hallmarks of repeat-induced point mutation. To investigate how such sequences induce methylation, we developed a sensitive in vivo system. Tests of various 25- to 100-bp synthetic DNA sequences revealed that both T and A residues were required on a given strand to induce appreciable methylation. Segments composed of (TAAA)(n) or (TTAA)(n) were the most potent signals; 25-mers induced robust methylation at the special test site, and a 75-mer induced methylation elsewhere. G:C base pairs inhibited methylation, and cytosines 5' of ApT dinucleotides were particularly inhibitory. Weak signals could be strengthened by extending their lengths. A:T tracts as short as two were found to cooperate to induce methylation. Distamycin, which, like the AT-hook DNA binding motif found in proteins such as mammalian HMG-I, binds to the minor groove of A:T-rich sequences, suppressed DNA methylation and gene silencing. We also found a correlation between the strength of methylation signals and their binding to an AT-hook protein (HMG-I) and to activities in a Neurospora extract. We propose that de novo DNA methylation in Neurospora cells is triggered by cooperative recognition of the minor groove of multiple short A:T tracts. Similarities between sequences subjected to repeat-induced point mutation in Neurospora crassa and A:T-rich repeated sequences in heterochromatin in other organisms suggest that related mechanisms control silent chromatin in fungi, plants, and animals.
96	NR	12615907	Secretory leukoprotease inhibitor (SLPI) protects tissue against the destructive action of neutrophil elastase at the site of inflammation. Recent studies on new functions of SLPI have demonstrated that SLPI may play a larger role in innate immunity than merely as a protease inhibitor. To clarify the functions of SLPI in bacterial infections, we generated SLPI-deficient mice (SLPI(-/-) mice) and analyzed their response to experimental endotoxin shock induced by lipopolysaccharide (LPS). SLPI(-/-) mice showed a higher mortality from endotoxin shock than did wild type mice. This may be explained in part by our observation that SLPI(-/-) macro-phages show higher interleukin 6 and high-mobility group (HMG)-1 production and nuclear factor kappaB activities after LPS treatment than do SLPI(+/+) macrophages. SLPI also affects B cell function. SLPI(-/-) B cells show more proliferation and IgM production after LPS treatment than SLPI(+/+) B cells. Our results suggest that SLPI attenuates excessive inflammatory responses and thus assures balanced functioning of innate immunity.
96	NR	12614161	HMGB1, a highly conserved non-histone DNA-binding protein, interacts with specific DNA structural motifs such as those encountered at cisplatin damage, four-way junctions, and supercoils. The interaction of full-length HMGB1, containing two tandem HMG box domains and a C-terminal acidic tail, with cisplatin-modified DNA was investigated by hydroxyl radical footprinting and electrophoretic gel mobility shift assays. The full-length HMGB1 protein binds to DNA containing a 1,2-intrastrand d(GpG) cross-link mainly through domain A, as revealed by footprinting, with a dissociation constant K(d) of 120 nM. Site-directed mutagenesis of intercalating residues in both HMG domains A and B in full-length HMGB1 further supports the conclusion that only one HMG box domain is bound to the site of cisplatin damage. Interaction of the C-terminal tail with the rest of the HMGB1 protein was examined by EDC cross-linking experiments. The acidic tail mainly interacts with domain B and linker regions rather than domain A in HMGB1. These results illuminate the respective roles of the tandem HMG boxes and the C-terminal acidic tail of HMGB1 in binding to DNA and to the major DNA adducts formed by the anticancer drug cisplatin.
96	NR	12604365	HMGB1 is an architectural factor that enhances the DNA binding affinity of several proteins. We have investigated the influence of HMGB1 on DNA binding by members of the Rel family. HMGB1 enhances DNA binding by p65/p50 and p50/p50, but reduces binding by p65/p65, c-Rel/c-Rel, p65/c-Rel, and p50/c-Rel. In pull-down assays, HMGB1 interacts directly with the p50 subunit via its HMG boxes and this interaction is weakened by the presence of the acidic tail. Functionally, HMGB1 is required for the NF-kappaB-dependent expression of the adhesion molecule VCAM-1.
96	NR	12590928	We analyzed the DNA-binding and DNA-bending properties of recombinant HMGB1 proteins based on a rice HMGB1 cDNA. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay demonstrated that rice HMGB1 can bind synthetic four-way junction (4H) DNA and DNA minicircles efficiently but the binding to 4H can be completed out by HMGA and histone H1. Conformational changes were detected by circular dichroism analysis with 4H DNA bound to various concentrations of HMGB1 or its truncated forms. T4 ligase-mediated circularization assays with short DNA fragments of 123 bp showed that the protein is capable of increasing DNA flexibility. The 123-bp DNA formed closed circular monomers efficiently in its presence, similar to that in an earlier study on maize HMG. Additionally, our results show for the first time that the basic N-terminal domain enhances the affinity of the plant HMGB1 protein for 4H DNA, while the acidic C-terminal domain has the converse effects.
96	NR	12570677	Several clinical trials have attempted to treat sepsis by blocking certain aspects of the inflammatory response. Tumor necrosis factor and interleukin 1 have been specific targets for inhibition but none of the trials have been successful. These trials were started on the basis of preclinical trials that suggested these would be effective. There were three lines of evidence to support the idea of cytokine inhibition. First, patients with increased levels of cytokines are more likely to die. Second, experimental animal models demonstrated that blocking the cytokines would improve outcome. Third, injection of purified, recombinant cytokines would cause both organ injury and death in experimental animals. Several additional aspects of the inflammatory response have been discovered since these trials were initiated. Included among these potential new targets are interleukin 18 and HMG-1. However, before new clinical trials are started there must be careful consideration of why previous interventions were not effective. The concept of blocking a single elevated cytokine may be too simple to deal with the complex problem of sepsis. As patients move through different phases of the septic response, there may be intervals when it is appropriate to inhibit multiple cytokines while at other times it may be appropriate to augment the immune response.
96	NR	12564926	NA
96	NR	12537698	The role of high mobility group-1 protein (HMG-1) in LPS- and TNF-alpha-induced lethal shock in galactosamine (GalN)-sensitized mice was investigated. No detectable HMG-1 levels were observed by immunoblotting analysis in plasma from untreated or GalN-sensitized BALB/c mice 5 h after LPS injection, although significant levels of HMG-1 were detected in plasma 6 h after the challenge. All GalN-sensitized BALB/c but not BALB/lps(d) mice succumbed by 6 h after LPS injection. When GalN-sensitized mice were injected with TNF-alpha, the presence of HMG-1 was seen at 5.5 h in plasma of BALB/c mice and at 6 h in BALB/lps(d) mice, although almost all GalN-sensitized BALB/c mice died by 6 h after challenge. The time-dependent phenomenon correlated with elevated serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST) levels and the appearance of apoptotic cells in livers. Administration of pooled plasma, equivalent to approximately 200 &mgr;g recombinant murine HMG-1, taken from mice on the verge of near death, did not result in induction of lethal shock in GalN-sensitized mice. Taken together with the late appearance of HMG-1 in moribund mice, these data suggest that HMG-1 does not decisively contribute to lethality in the GalN sensitization model.
96	DR	12473246	The molecule SOX13 was initially identified as an autoantigen (ICA12) in Type 1 diabetes. SOX13 is a member of the SOX family of transcriptional regulatory proteins that contain a high mobility group (HMG) motif with structural similarity to HMG proteins 1 and 2. Antibodies to HMG 1 and 2 occur in autoimmune diseases of the liver and in ulcerative colitis. We measured the occurrence and levels of anti-SOX13 by radioimmunoprecipitation in primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) and other diseases, and compared frequencies with anti-HMG measured by ELISA. Anti-SOX13 was detected in 18% of patients with PBC, 13% with autoimmune hepatitis, 18% with Type 1 diabetes, at lower frequencies in other conditions including the multisystem autoimmune diseases, systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis, and in 1% of normal sera. Anti-HMG1 and anti-HMG2 occurred at frequencies of 30% and 35% respectively in PBC. Serum levels of anti-SOX13 and anti-HMG correlated significantly for PBC although not for Type 1 diabetes. Anti-SOX13 in PBC may occur merely as an immune response to products of damage to parenchymal tissue, or may be illustrative of a general proclivity of transcriptional regulatory proteins to elicit autoimmune responses.
96	NR	12468716	Using a cloned single domain of the high mobility group protein 1 (HMGB1), we evaluated the effect of introducing metal binding site(s) on protein stability and function. An HMG domain is a conserved sequence of approximately 80 amino acids rich in basic, aromatic and proline residues that is active in binding DNA in a sequence- or structure-specific manner. The design strategy focuses on anchoring selected regions of the protein, specifically loops and turns in the molecule, using His-metal ligands. Changes in secondary structure, thermostability and DNA binding properties of a series of such mutants were evaluated. The two most stable mutant constructs contain three surface histidine replacements (two metal binding sites) in the regions encompassing both turns of the molecule. On ligation with the divalent nickel cation, the stability of these two triple histidine mutants (I38H/N51H/D55H and G39H/N51H/D55H) increases by 1.3 and 1.6 kcal/mol, respectively, relative to the wild-type protein, although the creation of binding sites per se destabilizes the protein. The DNA-binding properties of the modified proteins are not impaired by the introduction of the metal binding motifs. These results indicate that it is feasible to stabilize protein tertiary structure using appropriate placement of surface His-metal bonds without loss of function.
96	NR	12455999	In the filamentous fungus Podospora anserina, two degenerative processes which result in growth arrest are associated with mitochondrial genome (mitochondrial DNA [mtDNA]) instability. Senescence is correlated with mtDNA rearrangements and amplification of specific regions (senDNAs). Premature death syndrome is characterized by the accumulation of specific mtDNA deletions. This accumulation is due to indirect effects of the AS1-4 mutation, which alters a cytosolic ribosomal protein gene. The mthmg1 gene has been identified as a double-copy suppressor of premature death. It greatly delays premature death and the accumulation of deletions when it is present in two copies in an ASI-4 context. The duplication of mthmg1 has no significant effect on the wild-type life span or on senDNA patterns. In anAS1+ context, deletion of the mthmg1 gene alters germination, growth, and fertility and reduces the life span. The deltamthmg1 senescent strains display a particular senDNA pattern. This deletion is lethal in an AS1-4 context. According to its physical properties (very basic protein with putative mitochondrial targeting sequence and HMG-type DNA-binding domains) and the cellular localization of an mtHMG1-green fluorescent protein fusion, mtHMG1 appears to be a mitochondrial protein possibly associated with mtDNA. It is noteworthy that it is the first example of a protein combining the two DNA-binding domains, AT-hook motif and HMG-1 boxes. It may be involved in the stability and/or transmission of the mitochondrial genome. To date, no structural homologues have been found in other organisms. However, mtHMG1 displays functional similarities with the Saccharomyces cerevisiae mitochondrial HMG-box protein Abf2.
96	NR	12391148	NA
96	DR	12242077	The activation of T-cells and macrophages and subsequent induction of cytokines are critical factors in the development of hepatitis. Up-regulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines, e.g. TNF has been shown to induce liver injury while counter regulation by anti-inflammatory cytokines, e.g. IL-10 is protective. We compared the induction of liver injury and the expression pattern of a variety of cytokines in T-cell- versus non-T-cell-dependent mouse models of liver injury. TNF, IFNgamma, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10 and IL-12 were measured in plasma and liver tissue after either Concanavalin A (Con A), D-galactosamine/lipopolysaccharide (GalN/LPS) or high dose LPS induced liver injury. Additionally, the intra-hepatic expression of the putative pathogenicity factor high mobility group 1 protein (HMG-1) was compared in all three models. Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd.
96	NR	12232253	A group of low molecular weight protein substrates was found to co-purify with casein kinase II from broccoli (Brassica oleracea var italica). These substrates showed very high affinity toward casein kinase II and were efficiently phosphorylated even in the presence of an excess of exogenous substrates. The broccoli substrates were purified from cytosolic extracts as a double band of related proteins migrating at 18.7 and 20 kD. Further microheterogeneity was revealed by anion-exchange high-performance liquid chromatography and mass spectroscopy. The actual molecular masses of the three major components identified by mass spectroscopy were determined to be 12,691, 13,256, and 14,128 D. The substrates showed characteristic amino acid composition with a high content of polar amino acids, including about 20% each of acidic and basic amino acids. They were soluble in 2% trichloroacetic acid. The substrates cross-reacted with an antibody against wheat high-mobility group protein d (HMGd) but not HMGa. The isolated broccoli HMGs showed general DNA-binding activity without preference for AT-rich DNA. The presence of these HMG proteins in the cytosolic fraction is similar to the distribution characteristics of the animal HMG-1 subgroup. On the basis of amino acid composition and DNA-binding specificity, the isolated broccoli HMGs resemble other plant HMGs homologous to the HMG-1 subgroup.
96	NR	12225869	Damage to the cerebral cortex results in neurological impairments such as motor, attention, memory and executive dysfunctions. To examine the molecular mechanisms contributing to these deficits, mRNA expression was profiled using high-density cDNA microarray hybridization after experimental cortical impact injury in mice. The mRNA levels at 2 h, 6 h, 24 h, 3 days and 14 days after injury were compared with those of control animals. This revealed 86 annotated genes and 24 expression sequence tags (ESTs) as being differentially expressed with a 1.5-fold or greater change. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis was used to independently verify these results for selected genes. Seven functional classes of genes were found to be altered following injury, including transcription factors, signal transduction genes and inflammatory proteins. While a few of these genes have been previously reported to be differentially regulated following injury, the most of the genes have not been previously implicated in traumatic brain injury (TBI) pathophysiology. For example, consistent with previous reports, the transcription factor c-jun and the neurotrophic factor bdnf mRNA levels were altered as a result of TBI. Among the novel genes, the mRNA levels for the high mobility group protein 1 (hmg-1), the regulator of G-protein signaling 2 (rgs-2), the transforming growth factor beta inducible early growth response (tieg), the inhibitor of DNA binding 3 (id3), and the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein H (hnrnp h) were changed following injury. The functional significance of these genes in neurite outgrowth, neuronal regeneration, and plasticity following injury are discussed.
96	NR	12215537	The nonhistone chromosomal protein high-mobility group 1 protein (HMG-1/HMGB1) can serve as an activator of p53 sequence-specific DNA binding (L. Jayaraman, N. C. Moorthy, K. G. Murthy, J. L. Manley, M. Bustin, and C. Prives, Genes Dev. 12:462-472, 1998). HMGB1 is capable of interacting with DNA in a non-sequence-specific manner and causes a significant bend in the DNA helix. Since p53 requires a significant bend in the target site, we examined whether DNA bending by HMGB1 may be involved in its enhancement of p53 sequence-specific binding. Accordingly, a 66-bp oligonucleonucleotide containing a p53 binding site was locked in a bent conformation by ligating its ends to form a microcircle. Indeed, p53 had a dramatically greater affinity for the microcircle than for the linear 66-bp DNA. Moreover, HMGB1 augmented binding to the linear DNA but not to the microcircle, suggesting that HMGB1 works by providing prebent DNA to p53. p53 contains a central core sequence-specific DNA binding region and a C-terminal region that recognizes various forms of DNA non-sequence specifically. The p53 C terminus has also been shown to serve as an autoinhibitor of core-DNA interactions. Remarkably, although the p53 C terminus inhibited p53 binding to the linear DNA, it was required for the increased affinity of p53 for the microcircle. Thus, depending on the DNA structure, the p53 C terminus can serve as a negative or a positive regulator of p53 binding to the same sequence and length of DNA. We propose that both DNA binding domains of p53 cooperate to recognize sequence and structure in genomic DNA and that HMGB1 can help to provide the optimal DNA structure for p53.
96	NR	12198705	BACKGROUND & AIMS: High mobility group (HMG) B1 is a nonhistone nuclear protein that was recently identified as a late-acting mediator of lipopolysaccharide-induced lethality in mice. The proinflammatory actions of HMGB1 have been localized to a region of the molecule called the B box. METHODS: To determine whether HMGB1 or B box are capable of causing derangements in intestinal barrier function, we incubated cultured Caco-2 human enterocytic monolayers with recombinant human HMGB1 or a 74-residue truncated form of the protein consisting of the B box domain. RESULTS: Both HMGB1 and B box increased the permeability of Caco-2 monolayers to fluorescein isothiocyanate-labeled dextran (FD4) in a time- and dose-dependent fashion. The increase in permeability was reversible following removal of the recombinant protein. Exposure of Caco-2 cells to B box resulted in increased expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase messenger RNA and increased production of NO. When we used various pharmacologic strategies to inhibit NO production or scavenge NO or peroxynitrite (ONOO(-)), we abrogated B box-induced hyperpermeability. Administration of B box to wild-type mice increased both ileal mucosal permeability to FD4 and bacterial translocation to mesenteric lymph nodes. These effects were not observed in inducible nitric oxide synthase knockout mice. CONCLUSIONS: These data support the view that HMGB1 and B box are capable of causing alterations in gut barrier function via a mechanism that depends on the formation of NO and ONOO(-).
96	NR	12126646	High-mobility group protein-1 (HMG-1 also termed HMGB-1), a DNA-binding protein, regulates gene transcription and stabilizes nucleosome formation. HMG-1 was recently implicated as a cytokine, because it is a late-acting mediator of endotoxin lethality that induces the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines from monocytes. Here it is shown that administration of HMG-1 into the cerebral ventricles decreases food intake (food intake=4.6g/mouse in controls vs 1.6g/mouse after 1 microg HMG-1 i.c.v.; P <0.05). Intracerebroventricular HMG-1 induced an increased in TNF and IL-6 expression in the brain, and mediated taste aversion with potencies equivalent to LPS. In a model of endotoxemia, passive immunization with anti-HMG-1 antibodies attenuated the development of hypophagia, indicating that HMG-1 is a mediator of sickness behaviour associated with endotoxemia.
96	NR	12065590	The high mobility group (HMG) proteins of the HMGB family are chromatin-associated proteins that can contribute to transcriptional control by interaction with certain transcription factors. Using the transcription factor Dof2 and five different maize HMGB proteins, we have examined the specificity of the HMGB-transcription factor interaction. The HMG-box DNA binding domain of HMGB1 is sufficient for the interaction with Dof2. Although all tested HMGB proteins can interact with Dof2, the various HMGB proteins stimulate the binding of Dof2 to its DNA target site with different efficiencies. The HMGB5 protein is clearly the most potent facilitator of Dof2 DNA binding. Maximal stimulation of the DNA binding by the HMGB proteins requires association of HMGB and Dof2 prior to DNA binding. HMGB5 and Dof2 form a ternary complex with the DNA, but within the protein-DNA complex the interaction of HMGB5 and Dof2 is different from that in solution, as in contrast to the proteins in solution, they cannot be cross-linked with glutaraldehyde when bound to DNA. Phosphorylation of HMGB1 by protein kinase CK2 abolishes the interaction with Dof2 and the stimulation of Dof2 DNA binding. These findings indicate that transcription factors may recruit certain members of the HMGB family as assistant factors.
96	NR	12056908	In the presence of an accessory DNA bending protein, the bacterial site-specific beta recombinase catalyzes resolution and DNA inversion. Five different maize high mobility group B (HMGB) proteins were examined for their potential to facilitate beta recombination in vitro using DNA substrates with different intervening distances (73-913 bp) between two directly oriented recombination (six) sites. All analyzed HMGB proteins (HMGB1 to HMGB5) could promote beta recombination, but depending on the DNA substrate with different efficiencies. The HMGB1 protein displayed an activity comparable to that of the natural promoting protein Hbsu, whereas the other HMGB proteins were less effective. Phosphorylation of the HMGB1 protein resulted in an increased efficiency of HMGB1 to promote beta recombination. Analyses of DNA substrates with closely spaced six sites demonstrated that in the presence of HMGB1 the recombination rate was correlated to the distance between the six sites, but independent of the helical orientation of the six sites. Using a Bacillus subtilis strain defective in Hbsu, the coexpression of beta recombinase and HMGB1 (or a truncated HMGB1 derivative) revealed that a plant HMG-box domain protein is sufficient for assisting beta to catalyze recombination in vivo. Our results using beta recombination as a model system suggest that the various plant HMGB proteins (and their posttranslationally modified versions) have the potential of forming a repertoire of different DNA structures, which is compatible with the idea that the HMGB proteins can act as architectural factors in a variety of nucleoprotein structures.
96	NR	12034830	The ability of the tumor suppressor protein, p53, to recognize certain types of DNA lesions may represent one of the mechanisms by which this protein modulates cellular response to DNA damage. p53 DNA binding properties are regulated by several factors, such as post-translational modifications including phosphorylation and acetylation, regulation by its own C-terminal domain and interactions with other cellular proteins. Substrates resembling Holliday junctions and extra base bulges were used to study the effect of three nuclear proteins, HMG-1, HMG I(Y) and hMSH2-hMSH6, on the lesion binding properties of p53. Gel retardation assays revealed that the three proteins had varying effects on p53 binding to these substrates. HMG-1 did not influence p53 binding to Holliday junctions or 3-cytosine bulges. HMG I(Y) rapidly dissociated p53 complexes with Holliday junctions but not 3-cytosine bulges. Finally, the mismatch repair protein complex, hMSH2-hMSH6, enhanced p53 binding to both substrates by 3-4-fold. Together, these results demonstrate that p53 DNA binding activity is highly influenced by the presence of other proteins, some having a dominant effect while others have a negative effect.
96	NR	12031669	We examined HMG domain protein recognition of major 1,2-GG intrastrand DNA crosslinks, formed by two bifunctional enantiomeric analogs of antitumor cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) (cisplatin), and removal of these crosslinks during in vitro nucleotide excision repair (NER) reactions. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays show that domains A and B of HMGB1 protein bind to (2R,3R)-diaminobutanedichloroplatinum(II)-generated crosslinks with a higher affinity than to those generated by (2S,3S)-diaminobutanedichloroplatinum(II). The crosslinks of both enantiomers are removed by NER with a similar efficiency; however, HMG1B protein significantly inhibits removal of the (2R,3R)-diaminobutaneplatinum(II) adduct, but not that of the (2S,3S) enantiomer. Thus, HMG domain proteins discriminate among different conformations of the 1,2-GG intrastrand crosslinks of the two enantiomeric analogs of cisplatin, which results in different NER of these crosslinks. This observation may provide insight into the mechanisms underlying antitumor activity of cisplatin and its analogs.
96	NR	12024049	HMGB1 (also called HMG-1) is a DNA-bending protein that augments the affinity of diverse regulatory proteins for their DNA sites. Previous studies have argued for a specific interaction between HMGB1 and target proteins, which leads to cooperative binding of the complex to DNA. Here we propose a different model that emerged from studying how HMGB1 stimulates enhanceosome formation by the Epstein-Barr viral activator Rta on a target gene, BHLF-1. HMGB1 stimulates binding of individual Rta dimers to multiple sites in the enhancer. DNase I and hydroxyl radical footprinting, electrophoretic mobility shift assays, and immobilized template assays failed to reveal stable binding of HMGB1 within the complex. Furthermore, mutational analysis failed to identify a specific HMGB1 target sequence. The effect of HMGB1 on Rta could be reproduced by individual HMG domains, yeast HMO1, or bacterial HU. These results, combined with the effects of single-amino-acid substitutions within the DNA-binding surface of HMGB1 domain A, argue for a mechanism whereby DNA-binding and bending by HMGB1 stimulate Rta-DNA complex formation in the absence of direct interaction with Rta or a specific HMGB1 target sequence. The data contrast with our analysis of HMGB1 action on another BHLF-1 regulatory protein called ZEBRA. We discuss the two distinct modes of HMGB1 action on a single regulatory region and propose how HMGB1 can function in diverse contexts.
96	NR	12015897	Overcoming local DNA rigidity is required to perform three-dimensional DNA-protein configuration at promoter regions. The abundant architectural nonhistone chromosomal HMG box proteins are nonsequence-specific; however, they have been established to specifically recognize distorted DNA. Using transient transfection to overexpress two different members of the HMGB-1/2 family of DNA architectural factors, we demonstrate that these proteins provide a general enhancement in reporter gene expression irrespective of the promoter being considered. Evidences are also provided indicating that stimulation may not be achieved by recruitment of the proteins by regulatory factors or as a consequence of major chromatin unfolding as previously suggested. Interestingly, the influence of the HMG box proteins under study was overridden when the promoters were either induced or stimulated by Trichostatin A (TSA) but recovered upon extended induction period. These results also support the concept that the architectural role of these proteins can contribute to the preinitiation complex assembly required for basal transcription, but to a much lesser extent to the poised promoter scaffolding characteristic of activated transcription.
96	NR	11995979	The high mobility group (HMG) proteins are abundant non-histone components of eukaryotic chromatin. The presence of C-terminal acidic tails is a common feature of the majority of HMG proteins. Although the biological significance of the acidic domains is not clear, they are conferring conformational and metabolic stability to the proteins in vitro. Moreover, the length and net charge of the acidic tails affect the strength of HMG protein interaction with DNA. Synthesis of an insect HMG protein by standard recombinant technology in bacteria leads to a mixture of the intact protein (cHMG1a-(1-113) (I)) and a series of its degradation products truncated at the C tail: cHMG1a-(1-111) (II); cHMG1a-(1-110) (III); cHuMGla-(1-109) (IV); cHMG1a-(1-108) (V); cHMG1a-(1-107) (VI); cHMG1a-(1-106) (VII). The proteins differ from each other only by the number of amino-acid residues at the C-terminal tail. We used H/D exchange mass spectrometry to characterize the stability of the proteins directly in their mixture. The results show that the proteins I-V and VII have very similar conformations. The protein VI is less compact and exchanges its protons faster than the others. It may be concluded that the C-terminal tail influences the conformation of the cHMG1a protein and that individual residues in this part of the protein play a key role in its compactness.
96	NR	11989650	Expression of the haptoglobin (Hp) gene is liver specific and acute phase (AP) responsive. It was previously shown that transcriptional induction process of the rat Hp gene during turpentine induced AP response has been mediated by the liver nucleoprotein p29 which was shown to be homologous to the HMG-1 chromatin-associated protein. The results presented in this report offered further evidence for the existence of structural and functional similarities between these two proteins implicating an involvement of HMG-1 in the regulation of the rat Hp gene transcription. By DNA binding assays we found the HMG-1 binding sites in the rat Hp gene cis-regulatory subelements A and C and revealed an increase in its DNA-binding after induction of AP response. In view of our previous and here shown data we assume that this increase could be a consequence of AP-induced release of HMG-1 from the chromatin and subsequent increase in its nuclear amount.
96	NR	11954836	There has been a widespread impression that tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) mediate the toxicity of high doses of lipopolysaccharide (LPS, endotoxin) and are key factors in septic shock. However, the clinical efficacy of treatment with antagonists of TNF-alpha and IL-1beta is still controversial, suggesting that mediators other than TNF-alpha and IL-1beta might contribute causally to endotoxin-induced death. Recent studies implicated high mobility group-1 (HMG-1) protein as a late mediator of endotoxin lethality in mice. However, the role of HMG-1 in mediating multiple organ damage-associating trauma has not been studied. This study was designed to investigate changes in HMG-1 gene expression in vital organs, and its potential role in mediating multiple organ damage following major burns. Wistar rats were subjected to a 35 percent full-thickness thermal injury, and randomly divided into three groups as follows: normal controls (n = 7), thermal injury (n = 24), and recombinant bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein (rBPI21) treatment (n = 12). Tissue samples from liver and lungs were collected to measure tissue endotoxin levels and HMG-1 mRNA expression. In addition, blood samples were obtained for measurement of organ function parameters. Our data demonstrated a significant increase in HMG-1 gene expression in tissues at 24 h postburn, which remained markedly elevated up to 72 h after thermal injury (P< 0.05-0.01). Treatment with rBPI21 could significantly decrease tissue HMG-1 mRNA expression in the liver and lung (P < 0.01). In addition, there were high positive correlations between hepatic HMG-1 mRNA and serum aminoleucine transferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) levels, and also between pulmonary HMG-1 mRNA and myeloperoxidase activities (P < 0.05-0.01). Taken together, these findings indicate that thermal injury per se can markedly enhance HMG-1 gene expression in various organs. Up-regulation of HMG-1 expression may be involved in the pathogenesis of endogenous endotoxin-mediated multiple organ damage secondary to major burns.
96	NR	11948683	We have purified a prominent 110-kDa protein (p110) from 1.6 M NaCl extracts of rat liver nuclei that appears to bind Ca2+. p110 was originally identified by prominent blue staining with 'Stains-All' in sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gels and was observed to specifically bind ruthenium red and 45Ca2+ in nitrocellulose blot overlays. In spin-dialysis studies, purified p110 saturably bound approximately 75 nmol Ca2+/mg protein at a concentration of 1 mM total Ca2+ with half-maximal binding observed at 105 microM Ca2+. With purification, p110 became increasingly susceptible to proteolytic (likely autolytic) fragmentation, although most intermediary peptides between 40 and 90 kDa retained "Stains-All", ruthenium red, and 45Ca2+ binding. N-terminal sequencing of intact p110 and a 70-kDa autolytic peptide fragment revealed a strong homology to nucleolin. Two-dimensional sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE)/IEF revealed autolysis produced increasingly acidic peptide fragments ranging in apparent pI's from 5.5 for intact p110 to 3.5 for a 40 kDa peptide fragment. Intact p110 and several peptide fragments were immunostained with a highly specific anti-nucleolin antibody, R2D2, thus confirming the identity of this protein with nucleolin. These annexin-like Ca2+-binding characteristics of nucleolin are likely contributed by its highly acidic argyrophilic N-terminus with autolysis apparently resulting in largely selective removal of its basic C-terminal domain. Although the Ca2+-dependent functions of nucleolin are unknown, we discuss the possibility that like the structurally analogous HMG-1, its Ca2+-dependent actions may regulate chromatin structure, possibly during apoptosis. Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
96	NR	11909973	The cytotoxic T-lymphocyte protease granzyme A induces caspase-independent cell death in which DNA single-stranded nicking is observed instead of oligonucleosomal fragmentation. A 270- to 420-kDa endoplasmic reticulum-associated complex (SET complex) containing the nucleosome assembly protein SET, the tumor suppressor pp32, and the base excision repair enzyme APE can induce single-stranded DNA damage in isolated nuclei in a granzyme A-dependent manner. The normal functions of the SET complex are unknown, but the functions of its components suggest that it is involved in activating transcription and DNA repair. We now find that the SET complex contains DNA binding and bending activities mediated by the chromatin-associated protein HMG2. HMG2 facilitates assembly of nucleoprotein higher-order structures by bending and looping DNA or by stabilizing underwound DNA. HMG2 is in the SET complex and coprecipitates with SET. By confocal microscopy, it is observed that cytoplasmic HMG2 colocalizes with SET in association with the endoplasmic reticulum, but most nuclear HMG2 is unassociated with SET. This physical association suggests that HMG2 may facilitate the nucleosome assembly, transcriptional activation, and DNA repair functions of SET and/or APE. HMG2, like SET and APE, is a physiologically relevant granzyme A substrate in targeted cells. HMG1, however, is not a substrate. Granzyme A cleavage after Lys65 in the midst of HMG box A destroys HMG2-mediated DNA binding and bending functions. Granzyme A cleavage and functional disruption of key nuclear substrates, including HMG2, SET, APE, lamins, and histones, are likely to cripple the cellular repair response to promote cell death in this novel caspase-independent death pathway.
96	NR	11839801	Two lymphoid cell-specific proteins, RAG-1 and RAG-2, initiate V(D)J recombination by introducing DNA breaks at recombination signal sequences (RSSs). Although the RAG proteins themselves bind and cleave DNA substrates containing either a 12-RSS or a 23-RSS, DNA-bending proteins HMG-1 and HMG-2 are known to promote these processes, particularly with 23-RSS substrates. Using in-gel cleavage assays and DNA footprinting techniques, I analyzed the catalytic activity and protein-DNA contacts in discrete 12-RSS and 23-RSS complexes containing the RAG proteins and either HMG-1 or HMG-2. I found that both the cleavage activity and the pattern of protein-DNA contacts in RAG-HMG complexes assembled on 12-RSS substrates closely resembled those obtained from analogous 12-RSS complexes lacking HMG protein. In contrast, 23-RSS complexes containing both RAG proteins and either HMG-1 or HMG-2 exhibited enhanced cleavage activity and displayed an altered distribution of cleavage products compared to 23-RSS complexes containing only RAG-1 and RAG-2. Moreover, HMG-dependent heptamer contacts in 23-RSS complexes were observed. The protein-DNA contacts in RAG-RSS-HMG complexes assembled on 12-RSS or 23-RSS substrates were strikingly similar at comparable positions, suggesting that the RAG proteins mediate HMG-dependent heptamer contacts in 23-RSS complexes. Results of ethylation interference experiments suggest that the HMG protein is positioned 5' of the nonamer in 23-RSS complexes, interacting largely with the side of the duplex opposite the one contacting the RAG proteins. Thus, HMG protein plays the dual role of bringing critical elements of the 23-RSS heptamer into the same phase as the 12-RSS to promote RAG binding and assisting in the catalysis of 23-RSS cleavage.
96	NR	11809932	Many proteins consist of subdomains that can fold and function independently. We investigate here the interaction between the two high mobility group (HMG) box subdomains of the nuclear protein rHMG1. An HMG box is a conserved amino acid sequence of approximately 80 amino acids rich in basic, aromatic and proline side chains that is active in binding DNA in a sequence or structure-specific manner. In the case of HMG1, each box can bind structural DNA substrates including four-way junctions (4WJs) and branched or kinked DNA duplexes. Since proteins containing up to six HMG boxes are known, the question arises whether linking subdomains together influences the folding or function of individual boxes. In an effort to understand interactions between individual DNA-binding domains in HMG1, we created new fusion proteins: one is an inversion of the order of the AB di-domain in HMG1 (BA); in the second, we added a third A domain C-terminal to the AB di-domain (ABA). Pairs of boxes, AB or BA, behave similarly and are functionally active. By contrast, the ABA triple subdomain construct is partially unfolded and is less active than individual boxes or di-domains. Thus, long-range inter-domain effects can influence the activity of HMG boxes.
96	NR	11793444	Acute lymphoblastic leukemia is the most common malignancy in childhood. High-resolution allelotyping performed in our laboratory showed new chromosomal sites of nonrandom deletions. We have focused our work on 8q12 deletions, which we have found in about 4% of patients (eight of 205 informative cases). These deletions were of small size (less than 1 Mb) in all but one patient, and the deleted region common to all patients was delineated between two microsatellite markers (D8S1113 and D8S1763). This region was sequenced entirely from two overlapping bacterial artificial chromosomes. The common deleted region (120 kb) had a low GC content (37%), was composed more than 50% of LINE sequences, and contained only two candidate genes. The centromeric deletion borders were clustered within an interval of 33 kb between two microsatellite markers. This interval contains the first exon of an HMG-1-related gene (KIAA0808) and a putative gene, DL8q12, predicted to encode a protein with 231 amino acid residues with no homolog in protein databases. Analysis of the available mRNA from lymphoblastic cells of two patients with 8q12 deletions using common polymorphisms in the 3' UTR of KIAA0808 showed monoallelic expression of this gene. Identification of a biallelic polymorphism in the first exon of DL8q12 showed that this gene was deleted in two of four informative cases. Sequencing of the exons of both genes from all patients with 8q12 deletions did not show any mutation, which suggests that neither of these genes behaves as a classic tumor suppressor gene. Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
96	NR	11779632	The mitochondrial histone, Abf2p, of Saccharomyces cerevisiae is essential for the maintenance of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and appears to play an important role in the recombination and copy number determination of mtDNA. Abf2p, encoded by a nuclear gene, is a member of HMG1 DNA-binding protein family and has two HMG1-Box domains, HMG1-Box A and B. To investigate the role of Abf2p in the control of mtDNA copy number, we asked if the in vivo functions of Abf2p are regulated by the possible modification such as phosphorylation. We found that the N-terminal extended segment (KRPT(21)S(22)) of HMG1-Box A is rapidly and specifically phosphorylated by cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) in vitro. The phosphorylation in this region inhibits the binding of Abf2p to all kinds of DNA including four-way junction DNA and the supercoiling activity of Abf2p itself. The abf2 mutant cells with an abf2(T21A/S22A) allele defective in the phosphorylation site have a severe defect in the regulation of mtDNA content during glucose repression in vivo. These observations suggest that the phosphorylation via PKA, that is activated during glucose repression, may regulate the in vivo functions of Abf2p for the control of mtDNA content during shift from gluconeogenic to fermentative growth.
96	NR	11748232	The recently cloned gene p73 is a close homologue of p53, which is a crucial tumor suppressor gene for preventing the malignant transformation of cells by inducing cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Previous reports have shown that architectural DNA-bending/looping chromosomal proteins HMGB1 and HMGB2 (formerly known as HMG1 and HMG2), which function in a number of biological processes including transcription and DNA repair, interact in vitro with p53 and stimulate p53 binding to DNA containing p53 consensus sites. Here, we report that HMGB1 physically interacts with two splicing variants of p73, alpha and beta (pull-down assay), and enhances binding of p73 to specific cognate DNA sites (gel-shift assay). Both HMG box domains of HMGB1, A and B, interact with p73alpha. Association of HMGB1 with p73, like the demonstrated ability of HMGB1 to stimulate p73 binding to different p53-responsive elements, requires the oligomerization region and/or region between DNA-binding domain and oligomerization domain of p73 (residues 312-381). Transient transfections revealed that ectopically expressed or endogenous HMGB1 and HMGB2 (antisense strategy) significantly inhibit in vivo both p73alpha/beta- and p53-dependent transactivation from the Bax gene promoter (and much less from Mdm2 and p21(waf1) promoters) in p53-deficient SAOS-2 cells. In contrast, HMGB1 and HGMB2 stimulate p73- or p53-dependent transactivation in p53-deficient H1299 cells, irrespective of the promoter used. Our results suggest that ubiquitously expressed HMGB1 and HMGB2 have potential to cell- and promoter-specifically down- or up-regulate in vivo transcriptional activity of different members of the p53 family. A possible mechanism of HMGB1-mediated modulation of p73- and p53-dependent transactivation is discussed.
96	NR	11748221	The chromatin high mobility group protein 1 (HMGB1) is a very abundant and conserved protein that is structured into two HMG box domains plus a highly acidic C-terminal domain. From the ability to bind DNA nonspecifically and to interact with various proteins, several functions in DNA-related processes have been assigned to HMGB1. Nevertheless, its functional role remains the subject of controversy. Using a phage display approach we have shown that HMGB1 can recognize several peptide motifs. A computer search of the protein data bases found peptide homologies with proteins already known to interact with HMGB1, like p53, and have allowed us to identify new potential candidates. Among them, transcriptional activators like the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein K (hnRNP K), repressors like methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2), and co-repressors like the retinoblastoma susceptibility protein (pRb) and Groucho-related gene proteins 1 (Grg1) and 5 (Grg5) can be found. A detailed analysis of the interaction of Grg1 with HMGB1 confirmed that the binding region contained the sequence homologous to one of the peptides identified. Our results have led us to propose that HMGB1 may play a central role in the stabilization and/or assembly of several multifunctional complexes through protein-protein interactions.
96	NR	11733188	The antitumor activity of cis-platin is believed to result from its interaction with cellular DNA and subsequent processing of DNA adducts by damage recognition proteins. Among them are the high mobility group (HMG) proteins 1 and 2, which have been hypothesized to mediate the effect of cis-platin. One possibility suggests that the tight binding of HMG1 to DNA adducts blocks the repair of damaged DNA. In order to further evaluate such a mechanism, several cis-platinum complexes with known antitumor activity have been used to treat DNA and the affinity of HMG1 to the DNA adduct induced by each drug was determined. The dissociation constants for the complexes of HMG1 with the platinated probe were obtained by gel mobility shift assays. The antitumor activity of the tested platinum compounds was found to correlate with the binding affinity of HMG1 to the respective drug-DNA adduct. These findings support the view that HMG1 contributes to cytotoxicity of cis-platin by shielding damaged DNA from repair. In addition, they offer a fast test for screening new platinum compounds for antitumor activity.
96	NR	11718452	We have identified and characterized the approximately 12-kb cDNA of a novel human gene (designated HALR for "homologous to ALR" and given the symbol MLL3 by the HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee) for which open reading frame (ORF) encodes a predicted large hydrophilic nuclear protein comprising 4,025 amino acids with a calculated molecular mass of approximately 443 kD. Within the amino acid sequence of HALR were identified a SUVAR3-9, enhancer of zeste, trithorax (SET) domain, three plant homeodomain (PHD)-type zinc fingers, a high motility group (HMG)-1 box, a leucine-zipper-like pattern, two potential transactivating domains, several nuclear localization signals, and multiple nuclear receptor interaction signature motifs. Especially within the SET domain, PHD fingers and several other regions, the HALR protein exhibits significant similarity to ALR (acute lymphoblastic leukemia [ALL]-1 related), ALL-1/myeloid/lymphoid or mixed-lineage leukemia (ALL-1/MLL), and trithorax, evolutionarily conserved proteins that influence differentiation and development. Northern blot analysis demonstrated transcripts of approximately 11-12 kb, while reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) revealed that HALR is expressed in a wide range of human tissues and cancer cell lines. The HALR gene contains 46 exons, is estimated to span >101 kb, and is located on chromosome region 7q36. Terminal 7q deletions are common chromosomal aberrations encountered in hematological neoplasia and in holoprosencephaly 3, a midline embryonic defect involving forebrain development. We have also isolated the partial cDNA of the murine homologue of HALR, which displays high homology to its human counterpart. Taking into consideration its notable protein motifs, ubiquitous expression, evolutionary conservation and chromosomal position, HALR is likely to play a housekeeping role in transcriptional regulation, and may be involved in leukemogenesis and developmental disorders.
96	NR	11694523	The high mobility group (HMG) proteins of the HMGB family are architectural factors in eukaryotic chromatin, which are involved in the regulation of various DNA-dependent processes. We have examined the post-translational modifications of five HMGB proteins from maize suspension cultured cells, revealing that HMGB1 and HMGB2/3, but not HMGB4 and HMGB5, are phosphorylated by protein kinase CK2. The phosphorylation sites have been mapped to the acidic C-terminal domains by analysis of tryptic peptides derived from HMGB1 and HMGB2/3 using nanospray ion trap mass spectrometry. In native HMGB1, Ser(149) is constitutively phosphorylated, whereas Ser(133) and Ser(136) are differentially phosphorylated. The functional significance of the CK2-mediated phosphorylation of HMGB proteins was analyzed by circular dichroism measurements showing that the phosphorylation increases the thermal stability of the HMGB proteins. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrate that the phosphorylation reduces the affinity of the HMGB proteins for linear DNA. The specific recognition of DNA minicircles is not affected by the phosphorylation, but a different pattern of protein-DNA complexes is formed. Collectively, these findings show that phosphorylation of residues within the acidic C-terminal domain of the HMGB proteins can modulate protein stability and the DNA binding properties of the HMGB proteins.
96	PR	11684893	OBJECTIVE: Previously we hypothesized that the occurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is enhanced by genomic instability induced by the integrated hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA. Using an in vitro recombination assay, we showed that a subgenomic fragment of HBV DNA designated 15AB (nt1855-1914) is indispensable for in vitro recombination, and also showed the existence of 15AB binding protein. On the assumption that the 15AB binding protein may be a candidate cellular recombinogenic protein which accelerates genomic instability and hepatocarcinogenesis, we tried to isolate it by southwestern screening. RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: We obtained several positive clones including mouse upstream binding factor (UBF) and DNA binding protein A (dbpA). UBF belongs to an HMG domain protein family and dbpA belongs to a Y box binding protein family. 15AB binding seemed to be mediated by the conserved DNA binding domains in these families, because other members in the families such as HMG1 and YB-1 also bound to 15AB. We report them here because several documents have already suggested the possible association of these families and DNA recombination. Copyright 2001 S. Karger AG, Basel
96	NR	11574059	BACKGROUND: SP100 is a nuclear protein that displays a number of alternative splice variants. In Old World monkeys, apes and humans one of these variants is extended by a retroprocessed pseudogene, HMG1L3, whose antecedent gene is a member of the family of high-mobility-group proteins, HMG1. This is one of only a few documented cases of a retropseudogene being incorporated into another gene as a functional exon. In addition to the HMG1L3 insertion, Old World monkey genomes also contain an Alu sequence within the last SP100-HMG intron. PCR amplification of the 3' end of the SP100 gene using genomic DNAs from human and New World and Old World monkey species, followed by direct sequencing of the amplicons has made dating the HMG1L3 and Alu insertion events possible. RESULTS: PCR amplifications confirm that the HMG1L3 retrotransposition into the SP100 locus occurred after divergence of New World and Old World monkey lineages, some 35-40 million years ago. PCR amplification also shows that an upstream Alu sequence was inserted in the last SP100-HMG intron after divergence of the Old World monkey and ape lineages. Direct sequencing of the Alu in five Old World monkey species places the latter event at around 19 million years ago. Finally, ten single base mutations and one deletion in the Alu differentiate African from Asian Old World monkey species. CONCLUSIONS: PCR and DNA sequence analysis of 'genetic fossils' such as retropseudogenes and Alu elements in primates give details as to the timing of such events and can reveal sequence features useful for other molecular phylogenetic applications.
96	NR	11513603	The high mobility group protein HMGB1 is a small, highly abundant protein that binds to DNA in a non-sequence-specific manner. HMGB1 consists of 2 DNA binding domains, the HMG boxes A and B, followed by a short basic region and a continuous stretch of 30 glutamate or aspartate residues. Isothermal titration calorimetry was used to characterize the binding of HMGB1 to the double-stranded model DNAs poly(dAdT).(dTdA) and poly(dGdC).(dCdG). To elucidate the contribution of the different structural motifs to DNA binding, calorimetric measurements were performed comparing the single boxes A and B, the two boxes plus or minus the basic sequence stretch (AB(bt) and AB), and the full-length HMGB1 protein. Thermodynamically, binding of HMGB1 and all truncated constructs to duplex DNA was characterized by a positive enthalpy change at 15 degrees C. From the slopes of the temperature dependence of the binding enthalpies, heat capacity changes of -0.129 +/- 0.02 and -0.105 +/- 0.05 kcal mol(-1) K(-1) were determined for box A and full-length HMGB1, respectively. Significant differences in the binding characteristics were observed using full-length HMGB1, suggesting an important role for the acid tail in modulating DNA binding. Moreover, full-length HMGB1 binds differently these two DNA templates: binding to poly(dAdT).(dTdA) was cooperative, had a larger apparent binding site size, and proceeded with a much larger unfavorable binding enthalpy than binding to poly(dGdC).(dCdG).
96	NR	11513581	Many of the proteins associated with amyloidoses have been found to share structural and sequence similarities, which are believed to be responsible for their capability to form amyloid fibrils. Interestingly, some proteins seem to be able to form amyloid-like fibrils although they are not associated with amyloidoses. This indicates that the ability to form amyloid fibrils may be a general property of a greater number of proteins not associated with these diseases. In the present work, we have searched for amyloidogenic consensus sequences in two current protein/peptide databases and show that many proteins share structures which can be predicted to form amyloid. One of these potentially amyloidogenic proteins is amphoterin (also known as HMG-1), involved in neuronal development and a ligand for the receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE). It contains an amyloidogenic peptide fragment which is highly homologous to the Alzheimer's amyloid beta-peptide. If enzymatically released from the native protein, it forms amyloid-like fibrils which are visible in electron microscopy, exhibit apple green birefringence under polarized light after Congo red staining, and increases thioflavin T fluorescence. This fragment also shows high affinity to Abeta as a free peptide or while part of the native protein. Our results support the hypothesis that the potential to form amyloid is a common characteristic of a number of proteins, independent of their relation to amyloidoses, and that this potential can be predicted based on the physicochemical properties of these proteins.
96	NR	11507219	The Borna disease virus (BDV) p24 phosphoprotein is an abundant protein in BDV-infected cultured cells and animal brains. Therefore, there is a possibility that binding of the p24 protein to cellular factor(s) induces functional alterations of infected neural cells in the brain. To identify a cellular protein(s) that interacts with BDV p24 protein, we performed far-Western blotting with extracts from various cell lines. Using recombinant p24 protein as a probe, we detected a 30-kDa protein in all cell lines examined. Binding between the 30-kDa and BDV p24 proteins was also demonstrated using BDV p24 affinity and ion-exchange chromatography columns. Microsequence analysis of the purified 30-kDa protein revealed that its N terminus showed complete homology with rat amphoterin protein, which is a neurite outgrowth factor abundant in the brain during development. Mammalian two-hybrid and immunoprecipitation analyses also confirmed that amphoterin is a specific target for the p24 protein in vivo. Furthermore, we showed that infection by BDV, as well as purified p24 protein in the medium, significantly decreased cell process outgrowth of cells grown on laminin, indicating the functional inhibition of amphoterin by interaction with the p24 protein. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed decreased levels of amphoterin protein at the leading edges of BDV-infected cells. Moreover, the expression of the receptor for advanced glycation end products, of which the extracellular moiety is a receptor for amphoterin, was not significantly activated in BDV-infected cells during the process of extension, suggesting that the secretion of amphoterin from the cell surface is inhibited by the binding of the p24 protein. These results suggested that BDV infection may cause direct damage in the developing brain by inhibiting the function of amphoterin due to binding by the p24 phosphoprotein.
96	NR	11497996	HMG1 and 2 (high mobility group proteins 1 and 2; renamed HMGB1 and 2) contain two DNA-binding HMG-box domains (A and B) and a long acidic C-terminal domain. They bind DNA without sequence specificity, but have a high affinity for bent or distorted DNA, and bend linear DNA. The individual A and B boxes (which, although broadly similar, show both structural and functional differences) exhibit many of the structure-specific properties of the whole protein. The acidic tail modulates the affinity of the tandem HMG boxes in HMG1 and 2 for a variety of DNA targets, including four-way junctions, but not distorted DNA minicircles, to which the proteins bind with very high affinity. HMG1 and 2 appear to play important architectural roles in the assembly of nucleoprotein complexes in a variety of biological processes, for example V(D)J recombination, the initiation of transcription, and DNA repair.
96	NR	11491303	DNA minicircles, where the length of DNA is below the persistence length, are highly effective, preferred, ligands for HMG-box proteins. The proteins bind to them "structure-specifically" with affinities in the nanomolar range, presumably to an exposed widened minor groove. To understand better the basis of this preference, we have studied the binding of HMG1 (which has two tandem HMG boxes linked by a basic extension to a long acidic tail) and Drosophila HMG-D (one HMG box linked by a basic region to a short and less acidic tail), and their HMG-box domains, to 88 bp and 75 bp DNA minicircles. In some cases we see cooperative binding of two molecules to the circles. The requirements for strong cooperativity are two HMG boxes and the basic extension; the latter also appears to stabilize and constrain the complex, preventing binding of further protein molecules. HMG-D, with a single HMG box, does not bind cooperatively. In the case of HMG1, the acidic tail is not required for cooperativity and does not affect binding significantly, in contrast to a much greater effect with linear DNA, or even four-way junctions (another distorted DNA substrate). Such effects could be relevant in the hierarchy of binding of HMG-box proteins to DNA distortions in vivo, where both single-box and two-box proteins might co-exist, with or without basic extensions and acidic tails.
96	NR	11432837	Yeast Spt16/Cdc68 and Pob3 form a heterodimer that acts in both DNA replication and transcription. This is supported by studies of new alleles of SPT16 described here. We show that Spt16-Pob3 enhances HO transcription through a mechanism that is affected by chromatin modification, since some of the defects caused by mutations can be suppressed by deleting the histone deacetylase Rpd3. While otherwise conserved among many eukaryotes, Pob3 lacks the HMG1 DNA-binding motif found in similar proteins such as the SSRP1 subunit of human FACT. SPT16 and POB3 display strong genetic interactions with NHP6A/B, which encodes an HMG1 motif, suggesting that these gene products function coordinately in vivo. While Spt16-Pob3 and Nhp6 do not appear to form stable heterotrimers, Nhp6 binds to nucleosomes and these Nhp6-nucleosomes can recruit Spt16-Pob3 to form SPN-nucleosomes. These complexes have altered electrophoretic mobility and a distinct pattern of enhanced sensitivity to DNase I. These results suggest that Spt16-Pob3 and Nhp6 cooperate to function as a novel nucleosome reorganizing factor.
96	NR	11425313	In plants, chromosomal high mobility group (HMG) proteins have been identified in the HMGA family, containing A/T-hook DNA binding motifs, and in the HMGB family, containing an HMG-box DNA binding domain, that are considered architectural factors in chromatin. We have characterized the association of the HMGA protein, five different HMGB proteins, and the structure-specific recognition protein 1 (SSRP1) with maize chromatin by extraction experiments using NaCl, ethidium bromide, spermine, and distamycin A. The difference in the release of the proteins from chromatin by these reagents indicates that they are differentially associated with chromatin. This was confirmed by treatment of chromatin with micrococcal nuclease, demonstrating that the HMGA, HMGB2/3, and SSRP1 proteins are enriched in the highly nuclease-sensitive fraction of chromatin, which is likely to be transcriptionally competent. As examined by electrophoretic mobility shift analyses, the HMGA protein and the proteins containing an HMG domain (HMGB proteins and SSRP1) bind specifically to purified maize mononucleosomes that contain a histone octamer and approximately 165 bp of DNA. The mode of interaction with the nucleosomes differs for HMGA and HMGB proteins. In the case of the HMGB1 protein, the full-length protein is required for specific nucleosome binding, as the individual HMG-box DNA binding domain (which is sufficient for DNA interactions) interacts nonspecifically with the nucleosomes. Collectively, these findings indicate that HMGA, the various HMGB proteins, and SSPR1 are differentially associated with plant chromatin and may act as architectural factors in different nucleoprotein structures.
96	NR	11412107	Laser-induced photo-cross-linking was investigated for DNA, modified with cisplatin at specific sites, bound to structure-specific recognition domains of proteins in the high-mobility group (HMG) class. The efficiency of photo-cross-linking depends on the wavelength and power of the laser, the nature of the protein domain, and the oligodeoxyribonucleotide sequences flanking the platinated site. Introduction of 5-iodouridine at thymine sites of the oligodeoxyribonucleotide as an additional photoreactive group did not increase the photo-cross-linking yield. Formation of platinum-mediated DNA-DNA interstrand cross-linking observed previously upon irradiation with 302 nm light [Kane, S. A., and Lippard, S. J. (1996) Biochemistry 35, 2180-2188] was significantly reduced with laser irradiation. HMG1 domain B is superior to domain A for platinum-mediated photo-cross-linking, a result attributed to the different positioning of the proteins with respect to the platinum adduct and the greater ability of domain B to access photolabilized platinum in the major groove. Studies with proteins containing specifically mutated amino acids, and with DNA probes in which the sequences flanking the platinum cross-link site were varied, suggest that the most effective photo-cross-linking occurs for protein domains bound symmetrically and flexibly to cisplatin-modified DNA. The thermodynamic equilibrium between the protein-platinated DNA complex and its components, revealed in gel electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs), is significantly shifted to the right upon irreversible photo-cross-linking. Thus, only upon photo-cross-linking can the interaction of cisplatin-DNA 1,3-intrastrand d(GpTpG) or interstrand cross-links with HMG1 domain B protein be detected. Photo-cross-linking is thus an effective tool for investigating the interaction of cisplatin-modified DNA with damage-recognition proteins under heterogeneous conditions such those in cell extracts or living cells.
96	NR	11404013	The mammalian Sry on the short arm of the Y chromosome encodes a nuclear factor-like protein harboring a DNA-binding domain known as the HMG box. The Sox genes encode similar factor like proteins, but the sequence similarity of the HMG box to that of Sry is variable as being at least 60%. The functional relationship of Sox to Sry genes with special reference to sex determination is unclear except for a few items such as human autosomal Sox9. Thus, it is significant to know more about the evolutionary in addition to the functional relationship between Sry and Sox genes for deepening and broadening our understanding concerning primary sex determination. Therefore, to clarify the ancestry and molecular evolution of the mammalian sex determining gene Sry with its evolutionary relationships to the Sox gene, a molecular phylogenetic tree for the HMG box superfamily was constructed and analyzed, and the following conclusions were reached: (1) The nuclear non histone HMG proteins are supposedly the oldest, appearing at least more than one billion years ago, before the divergence of animals and plants. They diverged into two subgroups: one contains HMG14 and HMG17, and the other one contains HMG1 and HMG2 with various other genes. Subsequent divergences include the nucleolar UBF, nuclear SSRP as well as fungal mating protein Mc, MAT and Ste11. (2) The Sox and Sry genes diverged following the diversification of lymphoid transcription factors TCF and LEF. The Sry gene might have definitely evolved from the Sox gene cluster a few hundred million years ago. Additionally, the marsupial Sry, e.g. from Wallabie's and Dunnart's, is distinguished by being distant from eutherian Sry, but being closely related to the Sox gene cluster. (3) Molecular evolutionary rates estimated in mammalian Sry as the divergent rate per 100 million years are much higher than in Sox genes or other genes from the HMG box superfamily. This rapid evolution of Sry might agree with the fact that the Srys are present not on the pseudoautosomal region but on the distal region with no recombination of the Y chromosomal short arm.
96	NR	11399082	Cmb1, a novel HMG box protein from Schizosaccharomyces pombe, has been characterized biochemically using glutaraldehyde cross-linking, gel-filtration and analytical ultracentrifugation. It was identified as a monomeric, non-spherical protein, with a tendency to aggregate in solution. Limited proteolysis with trypsin and chymotrypsin showed that the C-terminal HMG box was a compact, proteolytically stable domain and the N-terminal region of Cmb1 was relatively unstructured and more easily digested.As Cmb1 was previously identified as a potential mismatch-binding protein, the binding constants and stoichiometry for both homoduplex and heteroduplex DNA were determined using an IASys resonant mirror biosensor. Cmb1 indeed demonstrated a tighter association with mismatched DNA, especially with the C/Delta-mismatch. Expression constructs of Cmb1 were made to study the sections of the protein involved in DNA binding. Constructs with the N-terminal region absent revealed that the C-terminal HMG box was the primary DNA-binding region. The presence of the N-terminal region did, however, facilitate tighter binding to both homoduplex and heteroduplex DNA. The amino acid residues isoleucine 14 and leucine 39 were located as putative intercalating residues using structure guided homology modelling. The model templates were derived from two distinct HMG:DNA complexes: HMG-D bound to homoduplex DNA and HMG 1 bound to cisplatin DNA. Binding studies using the Cmb1 HMG box with point mutations in these residues showed that isoleucine 14 was important for the binding of Cmb1 to homoduplex DNA, but affected binding to mismatches to a lesser extent. In contrast, leucine 39 appeared to have a more significant function in binding to mismatched DNA. Copyright 2001 Academic Press.
96	NR	11390376	High mobility protein-1 (HMG-1) has been shown to regulate transcription by RNA polymerase II. In the context that it acts as a transcriptional repressor, it binds to the TATA-binding protein (TBP) to form the HMG-1/TBP/TATA complex, which is proposed to inhibit the assembly of the preinitiation complex. By using electrophoretic mobility shift assays, we show that the acidic C-terminal domain of HMG-1 and the N terminus of human TBP are the domains that are essential for the formation of a stable HMG-1/TBP/TATA complex. HMG-1 binding increases the affinity of TBP for the TATA element by 20-fold, which is reflected in a significant stimulation of the rate of TBP binding, with little effect on the dissociation rate constant. In support of the binding target of HMG-1 being the N terminus of hTBP, the N-terminal polypeptide of human TBP competes with and inhibits HMG-1/TBP/TATA complex formation. Deletion of segments of the N terminus of human TBP was used to map the region(s) where HMG-1 binds. These findings indicate that interaction of HMG-1 with the Q-tract (amino acids 55-95) in hTBP is primarily responsible for stable complex formation. In addition, HMG-1 and the monoclonal antibody, 1C2, specific to the Q-tract, compete for the same site. Furthermore, calf thymus HMG-1 forms a stable complex with the TBP/TATA complex that contains TBP from either human or Drosophila but not yeast. This is again consistent with the importance of the Q-tract for this stable interaction and shows that the interaction extends over many species but does not include yeast TBP.
96	NR	11389716	High-mobility-group proteins HMG-1 and HMG-I/Y bind at overlapping sites within the A/T-rich enhancer element of the pea plastocyanin gene. Competition binding experiments revealed that HMG-1 enhanced the binding of HMG-I/Y to a 31-bp region (P31) of the enhancer. Circularization assays showed that HMG-1, but not HMG-I/Y, was able to bend a linear 100-bp DNA containing P31 so that the ends could be ligated. HMG-1, but not HMG-I/Y, showed preferential binding to the circular 100-bp DNA compared with the equivalent linear DNA, indicating that alteration of the conformation of the DNA by HMG-1 was not responsible for enhanced binding of HMG-I/Y. Direct interaction of HMG-I/Y and HMG-1 in the absence of DNA was demonstrated by binding of 35S-labeled proteins to immobilized histidine-tagged proteins, and this was due to an interaction of the N-terminal HMG-box-containing region of HMG-1 and the C-terminal AT-hook region of HMG-I/Y. Kinetic analysis using the IAsys biosensor revealed that HMG-1 had an affinity for immobilized HMG-I/Y (Kd = 28 nM) similar to that for immobilized P31 DNA. HMG-1-enhanced binding of HMG-I/Y to the enhancer element appears to be mediated by the formation of an HMG-1-HMG-I/Y complex, which binds to DNA with the rapid loss of HMG-1.
96	NR	11344319	An NMR model is presented for the structure of HMG-D, one of the DROSOPHILA: counterparts of mammalian HMG1/2 proteins, bound to a particular distorted DNA structure, a dA(2) DNA bulge. The complex is in fast to intermediate exchange on the NMR chemical shift time scale and suffers substantial linebroadening for the majority of interfacial resonances. This essentially precludes determination of a high-resolution structure for the interface based on NMR data alone. However, by introducing a small number of additional constraints based on chemical shift and linewidth footprinting combined with analogies to known structures, an ensemble of model structures was generated using a computational strategy equivalent to that for a conventional NMR structure determination. We find that the base pair adjacent to the dA(2) bulge is not formed and that the protein recognizes this feature in forming the complex; intermolecular NOE enhancements are observed from the sidechain of Thr 33 to all four nucleotides of the DNA sequence step adjacent to the bulge. Our results form the first experimental demonstration that when binding to deformed DNA, non-sequence-specific HMG proteins recognize the junction between duplex and nonduplex DNA. Similarities and differences of the present structural model relative to other HMG-DNA complex structures are discussed.
96	NR	11303722	High-mobility group-1 (HMG-1), an abundant, highly conserved cellular protein, is widely known as a nuclear DNA-binding protein that stabilizes nucleosome formation, facilitates gene transcription, and regulates the activity of steroid hormone receptors. We discovered that HMG-1 is a late mediator of delayed endotoxin lethality. When released by activated monocytes, it participates in the development of lethality and it activates downstream cytokine release. This review covers the general features of HMG-1 and its newly appreciated role as a cytokine.
96	NR	11294645	High mobility group (HMG) 1 protein and its two homologous DNA-binding domains, A and B ("HMG-boxes"), can bend and supercoil DNA in the presence of topoisomerase I, as well as recognize differently bent and distorted DNA structures, including four-way DNA junctions, supercoiled DNA and DNA modified with anticancer drug cisplatin. Here we show that the lysine-rich part of the linker region between A and B domains of HMG-1, the (85)TKKKFKD(91) sequence that is attached to the N-terminus of the B domain within HMG-1, is a prerequisite for a preferential binding of the B domain to supercoiled DNA. The above sequence is also essential for a high-affinity binding of the B domain to DNA containing a site-specific major 1,2-d(GpG) intrastrand DNA adduct of cisplatin. Mutation of Arg(97), but not Lys(90) [Lys(90) forms a specific cross-link with platinum(II) in major groove of cisplatin-modified DNA; Kane, S. A., and Lippard, S. J. (1996) Biochemistry 35, 2180--2188], to alanine significantly (>40-fold) reduces affinity of the B domain to cisplatin-modified DNA, inhibits the ability of the B domain to bend (ligase-mediated circularization) or supercoil DNA, and results in a loss of the preferential binding of the B domain to supercoiled DNA without affecting the structural-specificity of the HMG-box for four-way DNA junctions. Some of the reported activities of the B domain are enhanced when the B domain is covalently linked to the A domain. We propose that binding of the A/B linker region within the major DNA groove helps the two HMG-1 domains to anchor to the minor DNA groove to facilitate their DNA binding and other activities.
96	NR	11279268	High-mobility-group (HMG) proteins are a family of non-histone chromosomal proteins which bind to DNA. They have been implicated in multiple aspects of gene regulation and cellular differentiation. Sulfoglucuronyl carbohydrate binding protein, SBP-1, which is also localized in the neuronal nuclei, was shown to be required for neurite outgrowth and neuronal migration during development of the nervous system. In order to establish relationship between SBP-1 and HMG family proteins, two HMG proteins were isolated and purified from developing rat cerebellum by heparin-sepharose and sulfatide-octyl-sepharose affinity column chromatography and their biochemical and biological properties were compared with those of SBP-1. Characterization by high performance liquid chromatography--mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS), partial peptide sequencing and western blot analysis showed the isolated HMG proteins to be HMG-1 and HMG-2. Isoelectric focusing, HPLC-MS and peptide sequencing data also suggested that HMG-1 and SBP-1 were identical. Similar to SBP-1, both HMG proteins bound specifically to sulfated glycolipids, sulfoglucuronylglycolipids (SGGLs), sulfatide and seminolipid in HPTLC-immuno-overlay and solid-phase binding assays. The HMG proteins promoted neurite outgrowth in dissociated cerebellar cells, which was inhibited by SGGLs, anti-Leu7 hybridoma (HNK-1) and anti-SBP-1 peptide antibodies, similar to SBP-1. The proteins also promoted neurite outgrowth in explant cultures of cerebellum. The results showed that the cerebellar HMG-1 and -2 proteins have similar biochemical and biological properties and HMG-1 is most likely identical to SBP-1.
96	NR	11278972	The prokaryotic beta-recombinase catalyzes site-specific recombination between two directly oriented minimal six sites in mammalian cells, both on episomic and chromatin-integrated substrates. Using a specific recombination activated gene expression system, we report the site-specific recombination activity of an enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) fused version of beta-recombinase (beta-EGFP). This allows expression of active beta-recombinase detectable in vivo and in fixed cells by fluorescence microscopy. In addition, cellular viability is compatible with a substantial level of expression of the beta-EGFP protein. Using fluorescence-activated cell sorting, we have been able to enrich cell populations expressing this fusion protein. Application of this strategy has allowed us to study in more depth the host factor requirements for this system. Previous work showed that eukaryotic HMG1 protein was necessary and sufficient to help beta-recombinase activity in vitro. The influence of ectopic expression of HMG1 protein in the recombination process has been analyzed, indicating that HMG1 overexpression does not lead to a significant increase on the efficiency of beta-recombinase-mediated recombination both on episomal substrates and chromatin-associated targets. In addition, beta-recombinase-mediated recombination has been demonstrated in HMG1 deficient cells at the same levels as in wild type cells. These data demonstrate the existence of cellular factors different from HMG-1 that can act as helpers for beta-recombinase activity in the eukaryotic environment.
96	NR	11275566	Nonhistone protein HMG2, like HMG1, binds with B-DNA in a sequence-nonspecific manner and causes structural alterations in DNA such as bending, kinking and unwinding. Here, we studied the functions of HMG2 domains in the DNA structural alteration and modulation by using various HMG2 peptides, and we demonstrated several new findings. The HMG box itself as a DNA-binding motif may have the basic function of inducing curvature, resulting in the apparent DNA bending in the DNA cyclization assay, but not of abruptly kinking DNA. The DNA-binding activity of HMG box B, which is enhanced by the presence of box A, together with the flanking regions of box B, causes DNA bending accompanying the kinking of the DNA main chain. The DNA unwinding accompanied by DNA kinking diminishes cruciform structures in supercoiled DNA. Analysis using mutant peptides for box A confirmed that box A in HMG2 functions as a mediator of DNA structural alteration together with box B. The present studies on the functional properties of the respective regions of HMG2 may help to elucidate the protein function.
96	NR	11257120	HMG1 (high mobility group 1) is a ubiquitous and abundant chromatin component. However, HMG1 can be secreted by activated macrophages and monocytes, and can act as a mediator of inflammation and endotoxic lethality. Here we document a role of extracellular HMG1 in cell migration. HMG1 (and its individual DNA-binding domains) stimulated migration of rat smooth muscle cells in chemotaxis, chemokinesis, and wound healing assays. HMG1 induced rapid and transient changes of cell shape, and actin cytoskeleton reorganization leading to an elongated polarized morphology typical of motile cells. These effects were inhibited by antibodies directed against the receptor of advanced glycation endproducts, indicating that the receptor of advanced glycation endproducts is the receptor mediating the HMG1-dependent migratory responses. Pertussis toxin and the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase inhibitor PD98059 also blocked HMG1-induced rat smooth muscle cell migration, suggesting that a G(i/o) protein and mitogen-activated protein kinases are required for the HMG1 signaling pathway. We also show that HMG1 can be released by damage or necrosis of a variety of cell types, including endothelial cells. Thus, HMG1 has all the hallmarks of a molecule that can promote atherosclerosis and restenosis after vascular damage.
96	NR	11246022	NA
96	NR	11245467	Using subtractive technology, we have generated metastasis-associated gene expression profiles for rat mammary and pancreatic adenocarcinomas. Several genes whose expression is thought to be related to tumor progression such as c-Met, urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor, ezrin, HMG-1, oncomodulin, cathepsin, and caveolin were thereby isolated. Half of the metastasis-associated clones showed no significant homology to genes with known function. Notably, several of the metastasis-associated clones were also expressed in metastatic lines but not in nonmetastatic lines of other tumor models. Furthermore, in situ hybridization using selected clones documents the relevance of these results for human cancer because strong expression in tumor cells including metastases was detected in human colorectal cancer samples and, to a lesser extent, in mammary cancer samples. These data support the concept that tumors express a "metastatic program" of genes.
96	NR	11191287	Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) have been widely studied and recognized to be clinically very important for some human diseases including systemic rheumatic diseases. We analyzed ANCA response and their target antigens in MRL/Mp-lpr/lpr (MRL-lpr) mice, an animal model of systemic rheumatic disease. P-ANCA was detected in 57% of the mice. Antibodies to the known P-ANCA target antigens at the same age were examined. Among these, antibodies to high mobility group (HMG) proteins HMG1 and HMG2 were detected in 57% of the mice, 75% of which were also positive for P-ANCA. These anti-HMG1/HMG2 activities were absorbed by preincubation with a mixture of HMG1 and HMG2. In contrast, antibodies to myeloperoxidase and cathepsin G were detected in 14% and 7%, respectively, but these activities were not inhibited by preincubation with corresponding antigens. In addition, the titers of P-ANCA and anti-HMG1/HMG2 antibodies in MRL-lpr mice were significantly correlated with each other. Thus, HMG1 and HMG2 were considered to be significant target antigens of P-ANCA in MRL-lpr mice.
96	NR	11118215	The Saccharomyces cerevisiae NHP6A and NHP6B proteins are chromatin architectural factors, functionally and structurally related to the mammalian high mobility group (HMG)-1 and -2 proteins, a family of non-sequence-specific DNA binding proteins. nhp6a nhp6b mutants have various morphological defects and are defective in the induced expression of several RNA polymerase II-transcribed genes. We found that NHP6A/B proteins are also required for full induction of the yeast CHA1 gene. Importantly, CHA1 basal level expression is increased 10-fold in an nhp6a nhp6b double deletion mutant. Micrococcal nuclease and DNase I analysis of the CHA1 gene in this strain showed an open promoter structure, characteristic of the activated state of this promoter, even under non-inducing conditions. To address the possible function of the NHP6A/B proteins in chromatin-mediated gene regulation, we performed whole-genome transcriptional profiling of a Deltanhp6a Deltanhp6b yeast strain. Our results suggest that NHP6A/B proteins play an important regulatory role, repressing as well as potentiating expression of genes involved in several cellular processes, and that NHP6A/B control is exerted at the level of the individual gene.
96	NR	11106654	A nonhistone chromosomal protein, high mobility group (HMG) 1, is ubiquitous in higher eukaryotic cells and binds preferentially to cisplatin-modified DNA. HMG1 also functions as a coactivator of p53, a tumor suppressor protein. We investigated physical interactions between HMG1 and p53 and the influence of p53 on the ability of HMG1 to recognize damaged DNA. Using immunochemical coprecipitation, we observed binding of HMG1 and p53. Interaction between HMG1 and p53 required the HMG A box of HMG1 and amino acids 363-376 of p53. Cisplatin-modified DNA binding by HMG1 was significantly enhanced by p53. An HMG1-specific antibody that recognized the A box of this protein also stimulated cisplatin-modified DNA binding. These data suggest that an interaction with either p53 or antibody may induce conformational change in the HMG1 A box that optimizes DNA binding by HMG1. Interaction of p53 with HMG1 after DNA damage may promote activation of specific HMG1 binding to damaged DNA in vivo and provide a molecular link between DNA damage and p53-mediated DNA repair.
96	NR	11099378	Oct-4 is a transcription factor that is specifically expressed in mouse embryonic stem cells and in cell lines derived thereof. In these cells, Oct-4 activates transcription from remote binding sites due to as of yet unknown co-activators. Expression of Oct-4 in differentiated cells is not sufficient to activate transcription from a distance, rather it requires the co-expression of co-activators such as the adenoviral oncoprotein E1A. In this paper, we used phage display to identify Oct-4-interacting proteins. We first analyzed the interaction between Oct-4 and E1A in order to optimize the biochemical conditions that enable Oct-4-specific interactions with other interacting proteins. A panning approach was used to enrich Oct-4 interacting phages from a pool of excess unspecific phages. The biochemical conditions established in our interaction assays were then used to screen a P19 EC cell cDNA expression library in M13 filamentous phage. A number of phage clones displaying portions of unknown and known transcription factors were obtained, from which the HMG-1 transcription factor was identified. HMG-1, and the closely related factor HMG-2, interact with Oct-4 when co-expressed in mammalian cells. In addition, HMG-1 was found to cooperate with Oct-4 in P19 EC cells. These results provide the first evidence of a non-viral factor that enhances Oct-4 distance-dependent transactivation in stem cells. Copyright 2000 Academic Press.
96	NR	11087395	Cisplatin exerts its anticancer activity by forming covalent adducts with DNA. High-mobility group (HMG)-domain proteins recognize the major 1,2-intrastrand cisplatin-DNA cross-links and can mediate cisplatin cytotoxicity. The crystal structure of HMG1 domain A bound to cisplatin-modified DNA, further analyzed here, reveals intercalation of a key Phe37 residue. Other published structures of HMG domains bound to DNA, including NHP6A and HMG-D, similarly indicate amino acid side chains intercalating into linear DNA to form a bend. To delineate the importance of such side chain intercalations and further to explore the binding modes of different HMG domains toward prebent DNA structures, site-directed mutagenesis was used to generate HMG1 domain A and domain B mutants. The affinities of these mutant proteins for cisplatin-modified DNA were determined in gel electrophoresis mobility shift assays. The results indicate that intercalating residues at positions 16 or 37 can both contribute to the binding affinity. The data further reveal that the length of the loop between helices I and II is not critical for binding affinity. Footprinting analyses indicate that the position of the intercalating residue dictates the binding mode of the domain toward platinated DNA. Both congruent and offset positioning of the HMG domain with respect to the locus of the cisplatin-induced bend in the DNA were encountered. Packing interactions in the crystal structure suggest how full-length HMG1 might bind to DNA by contacting more than one duplex simultaneously. Taken together, these results demonstrate that cisplatin modification of DNA provides an energetically favorable, prebent target for HMG domains, which bind to these targets through one or more side chain and favorable hydrophobic surface interactions.
96	NR	11086163	The high mobility group protein HMG-D is known to bind preferentially to DNA of irregular structures with little or no sequence specificity. Upon binding to DNA, this HMG-box protein widens the minor groove of the double helix and induces a significant bending of the helix. We show here that HMG-D can strongly bind to double-stranded RNA. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays show that HMG-D100 interacts with the transactivation response region (TAR) RNA from HIV-1. Strong interaction with a high affinity Rev protein binding element (RBE) RNA was also characterized. Gel shift experiments performed with several TAR RNA constructs lacking the lateral pyrimidine bulge or with modified apical loop regions indicate that the protein does not recognize the single-strand domains of the RNA but apparently interacts directly with the double-stranded stem regions. No protein-RNA complexes could be detected when using single-stranded oligoribonucleotides. HMG-D protein could bind to the wide minor groove of the A-form TAR RNA. The comparison of the amino acid sequence of HMG-D with that of known RNA binding proteins suggests that the interaction of the protein with a double-stranded RNA implicates the basic region of HMG-D as well as its HMG-box domain. From the in vitro data reported here, we propose a novel functional role for proteins of the HMG-1 family. The results suggest that architectural HMG proteins can be recruited by double-stranded RNA for the development of HIV-1 in the host cell.
96	NR	11080451	The high-mobility group (HMG) proteins HMG1, HMG2 and HMG2a are relatively abundant vertebrate DNA-binding and bending proteins that bind with structure specificity, rather than sequence specificity, and appear to play an architectural role in the assembly of nucleoprotein complexes. They have two homologous "HMG-box" DNA-binding domains (which show about 80 % homology) connected by a short basic linker to an acidic carboxy-terminal tail that differs in length between HMG1 and 2. To gain insights into the role of the acidic tail, we examined the DNA-binding properties of HMG1, HMG2b and HMG2a from chicken erythrocytes (corresponding to HMG1, HMG2 and HMG2a in other vertebrates). HMG1, with the longest acidic tail, is less effective than HMG2a and 2b (at a given molar input ratio) in supercoiling relaxed, closed circular DNA, in inducing ligase-mediated circularisation of an 88 bp DNA fragment, and in binding to four-way DNA junctions in a gel-shift assay. Removal of the acidic tail increases the affinity of the HMG boxes for DNA and largely abolishes the differences between the three species. Switching the acidic tail of HMG1 for that of HMG2a or 2b gives hybrid proteins with essentially the same DNA-binding properties as HMG2a, 2b. The length (and possibly sequence) of the acidic tail thus appears to be the dominant factor in mediating the differences in properties between HMG1, 2a and 2b and finely tunes the rather similar DNA-binding properties of the tandem HMG boxes, presumably to fulfill different cellular roles. The tail is essential for structure-selective DNA-binding of the HMG boxes to DNA minicircles in the presence of equimolar linear DNA, and has little effect on the affinity for this already highly distorted DNA ligand, in contrast to binding to linear and four-way junction DNA. Copyright 2000 Academic Press.
96	NR	11036848	OBJECTIVE: To compare the frequencies of antibodies to high mobility group proteins 1 and 2 (HMG-1, HMG-2) in boys and girls with juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA). METHODS: Sera of 60 children (44 girls, 16 boys) with JIA were screened for the presence of anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) and antichromatin antibodies by indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) on eukaryotic cells and were assayed further for the presence of antibodies to purified HMG-1 and HMG-2 by enzyme immunoassays. RESULTS: A positive test for ANA was significantly associated with the presence of antibodies to both HMG-1 and HMG-2. There was a significant association between antibodies targeting the chromosomal regions of metaphase cells and antibodies to both HMG-1 and HMG-2. Females were significantly more likely than males to have ANA, and specifically more likely to have antibodies to HMG-1. There was a significant association between the presence of antibodies to HMG proteins and chromosomal reactivity detected by IIF on HEp-2 cells. CONCLUSION: The results suggest that females with JIA are more likely to be ANA positive than males and more likely than males to have antibodies to HMG-1.
96	NR	11033083	BACKGROUND: Overexpression of the high-mobility group, HMG I/Y, family of chromatin oncoproteins has been implicated as a clinical diagnostic marker for both neoplastic cellular transformation and increased metastatic potential of several human cancers. These minor groove DNA-binding oncoproteins are thus an attractive target for anti-tumor chemotherapy. FR900482 represents a new class of anti-tumor agents that bind to the minor groove of DNA and exhibit greatly reduced host toxicity compared to the structurally related mitomycin C class of anti-tumor drugs. We report covalent cross-linking of DNA to HMG I/Y by FR900482 in vivo which represents the first example of a covalent DNA-drug-protein cross-link with a minor groove-binding oncoprotein and a potential novel mechanism through which these compounds exert their anti-tumor activity. RESULTS: Using a modified chromatin immunoprecipitation procedure, fragments of DNA that have been covalently cross-linked by FR900482 to HMG I/Y proteins in vivo were polymerase chain reaction-amplified, isolated and characterized. The nuclear samples from control cells were devoid of DNA fragments whereas the nuclear samples from cells treated with FR900482 contained DNA fragments which were cross-linked by the drug to the minor groove-binding HMG I/Y proteins in vivo. Additional control experiments established that the drug also cross-linked other non-oncogenic minor groove-binding proteins (HMG-1 and HMG-2) but did not cross-link major groove-binding proteins (Elf-1 and NFkappaB) in vivo. Our results are the first demonstration that FR900482 cross-links a number of minor groove-binding proteins in vivo and suggests that the cross-linking of the HMG I/Y oncoproteins may participate in the mode of efficacy as a chemotherapeutic agent. CONCLUSIONS: We have illustrated that the FR class of anti-tumor antibiotics, represented in this study by FR900482, is able to produce covalent cross-links between the HMG I/Y oncoproteins and DNA in vivo. The ability of this class of compounds to cross-link the HMG I/Y proteins in the minor groove of DNA represents the first demonstration of drug-induced cross-linking of a specific cancer-related protein to DNA in living cells. We have also demonstrated that FR900482 cross-links other minor groove-binding proteins (HMG-1 and HMG-2 in the present study) in vivo; however, since HMG I/Y is the only minor groove-binding oncoprotein presently known, it is possible that these non-histone chromatin proteins are among the important in vivo targets of this family of drugs. These compounds have already been assessed as representing a compelling clinical replacement for mitomycin C due to their greatly reduced host toxicity and superior DNA interstrand cross-linking efficacy. The capacity of FR900482 to cross-link the HMG I/Y oncoprotein with nuclear DNA in vivo potentially represents a significant elucidation of the anti-tumor efficacy of this family of anticancer agents.
96	NR	11024186	The HMG1/2 family is a large group of proteins that share a conserved sequence of approximately 80 amino acids rich in basic, aromatic and proline side chains, referred to as an HMG box. Previous studies show that HMG boxes can bind to DNA in a structure-specific manner. To define the basis for DNA recognition by HMG boxes, we characterize the interaction of two model HMG boxes, one a structure-specific box, rHMGb from the rat HMG1 protein, the other a sequence-specific box, Rox1 from yeast, with oligodeoxynucleotide substrates. Both proteins interact with single-stranded oligonucleotides in this study to form 1:1 complexes. The stoichiometry of binding of rHMGb to duplex or branched DNAs differs: for a 16mer duplex we find a weak 2:1 complex, while a 4:1 protein:DNA complex is detected with a four-way DNA junction of 16mers in the presence of Mg(2+). In the case of the sequence-specific Rox1 protein we find tight 1:1 and 2:1 complexes with its cognate duplex sequence and again a 4:1 complex with four-way branched DNA. If the DNA branching is reduced to three arms, both proteins form 3:1 complexes. We believe that these multimeric complexes are relevant for HMG1/2 proteins in vivo, since Mg(2+) is present in the nucleus and these proteins are expressed at a very high level.
96	NR	10995245	HMG-domain proteins bind strongly to bent DNA structures, including cruciform and cisplatin-modified duplexes. Such protein-platinated DNA complexes, formed where the DNA is modified by the active cis but not the inactive trans isomer of diamminedichloroplatinum(II), are implicated in the cytotoxic mechanism of the drug. A series of oligonucleotide duplexes with deoxyguanosine nucleosides flanking a cis-[Pt(NH(3))(2) inverted question markd(GpG)-N7(1),-N7(2) inverted question mark] cross-link have been synthesized. These probes were used to determine the flanking sequence dependence of the affinity of the individual HMG domains of HMG1 toward cisplatin-modified DNA. Nine related sequences, where N(1) and N(2) are not dG and GG is the 1,2-intrastrand cisplatin adduct in N(1)GGN(2), were previously investigated [Dunham, S. U., and Lippard, S. J. (1997) Biochemistry 36, 11428-11436]. Three of the seven remaining possible sequences for which N(1) and/or N(2) was dG were prepared here by using normal deoxyguanosine, but the rest, where N(1) is dG and N(2) is dA, dC, T, or dG, could not be isolated in pure form. These sequences were accessed by using the synthetic bases 7-deazaadenine and 7-deazaguanine, which lack the nucleophilic N7 atom in the purine ring. Deaza nucleotides accurately mimic the properties of the natural bases, allowing the interaction of the HMG-domain proteins with cisplatin-modified DNA to be examined. These experiments reveal that the flexibility of A.T versus G.C flanking base pairs, rather than base-specific contacts, determines HMG1domA protein selectivity. This conclusion was supported by use of mutant HMG1domA and HMG1domB proteins, which exhibit identical flanking sequence selectivity. The methods and results obtained here not only improve our understanding of how proteins might mediate cisplatin genotoxicity but also should apply more generally in the investigation of how other proteins interact with damaged DNA.
96	NR	10975801	Acute inflammatory lung injury is often a delayed complication of critical illness and is associated with increased mortality. High mobility group-1 (HMG-1) protein, in addition to its role as a transcriptional regulatory factor, has recently been identified as a late mediator of endotoxin lethality. In the present studies, HMG-1 given intratracheally produced acute inflammatory injury to the lungs, with neutrophil accumulation, the development of lung edema, and increased pulmonary production of IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, and macrophage-inflammatory protein-2. In endotoxin-induced acute lung inflammation, administration of anti-HMG-1 Abs either before or after endotoxin exposure decreased the migration of neutrophils to the lungs as well as lung edema. These protective effects of anti-HMG-1 were specific, because pulmonary levels of IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, or macrophage-inflammatory protein-2 were not decreased after therapy with anti-HMG-1. Together, these findings indicate that HMG-1 is a distal mediator of acute inflammatory lung injury.
96	NR	10962007	HMG (high mobility group) 1 is a chromosomal protein with two homologous DNA-binding domains, the HMG boxes A and B. HMG-1, like its individual HMG boxes, can recognize structural distortion of DNA, such as four-way DNA junctions (4WJs), that are very likely to have features common to their natural, yet unknown, cellular binding targets. HMG-1 can also bend/loop DNA and introduce negative supercoils in the presence of topoisomerase I in topologically closed DNAs. Results of our gel shift assays demonstrate that mutation of Arg(97) within the extended N-terminal strand of the B domain significantly (>50-fold) decreases affinity of the HMG box for 4WJs and alters the mode of binding without changing the structural specificity for 4WJs. Several basic amino acids of the extended N-terminal strand (Lys(96)/Arg(97)) and helix I (Arg(110)/Lys(114)) of the B domain participate in DNA binding and supercoiling. The putative intercalating hydrophobic Phe(103) of helix I is important for DNA supercoiling but dispensable for binding to supercoiled DNA and 4WJs. We conclude that the B domain of HMG-1 can tolerate substitutions of a number of amino acid residues without abolishing the structure-specific recognition of 4WJs, whereas mutations of most of these residues severely impair the topoisomerase I-mediated DNA supercoiling and change the sign of supercoiling from negative to positive.
96	NR	10952726	Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is lethal to animals because it activates cytokine release, causing septic shock and tissue injury. Early proinflammatory cytokines (e.g., tumor necrosis factor [TNF] and interleukin [IL]-1) released within the first few hours of endotoxemia stimulate mediator cascades that persist for days and can lead to death. High mobility group 1 protein (HMG-1), a ubiquitous DNA-binding protein, was recently identified as a "late" mediator of endotoxin lethality. Anti-HMG-1 antibodies neutralized the delayed increase in serum HMG-1, and protected against endotoxin lethality, even when passive immunization was delayed until after the early cytokine response. Here we examined whether HMG-1 might stimulate cytokine synthesis in human peripheral blood mononuclear cell cultures. Addition of purified recombinant HMG-1 to human monocyte cultures significantly stimulated the release of TNF, IL-1alpha, IL-1beta, IL-1RA, IL-6, IL-8, macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-1alpha, and MIP-1beta; but not IL-10 or IL-12. HMG-1 concentrations that activated monocytes were within the pathological range previously observed in endotoxemic animals, and in serum obtained from septic patients. HMG-1 failed to stimulate cytokine release in lymphocytes, indicating that cellular stimulation was specific. Cytokine release after HMG-1 stimulation was delayed and biphasic compared with LPS stimulation. Computer-assisted image analysis demonstrated that peak intensity of HMG-1-induced cellular TNF staining was comparable to that observed after maximal stimulation with LPS. Administration of HMG-1 to Balb/c mice significantly increased serum TNF levels in vivo. Together, these results indicate that, like other cytokine mediators of endotoxin lethality (e.g., TNF and IL-1), extracellular HMG-1 is a regulator of monocyte proinflammatory cytokine synthesis.
96	NR	10945232	It is now well established that the HMG box DNA-binding motif can alter the topology of double-stranded DNA in several ways. Using the spermatid-specific tsHMG as a model protein of the HMG-1/-2 family, we have demonstrated that its expression in E. coli produces an increase in plasmid supercoiling density that is likely a consequence of its ability to constrain free supercoils in vivo. As demonstrated in vitro, stabilization of free DNA supercoils by tsHMG prevents topoisomerase I from gaining access to the template and could represent a mechanism for the apparent inhibition of topoisomerase I in bacteria. A similar modulation of eukaryotic topoisomerase I activity was not detected after expression of the tsHMG in mammalian cells. This differential response is discussed in terms of the marked difference in DNA packaging and accessibility of free supercoils in prokaryotic vs. eukaryotic cells.
96	NR	10942599	The homeobox gene Hoxa-1 is transcriptionally regulated by retinoic acid (RA) and encodes a transcription factor which has been shown to play important roles in cell differentiation and embryogenesis. In order to clone and characterize target genes of Hoxa-1, we utilized differential hybridization screening and cDNA subtractive hybridization methods to identify genes which are differentially expressed in F9-10, a murine F9 teratocarcinoma stem cell line which expresses high levels of exogenous Hoxa-1, compared to F9 wild-type stem cells, which do not express endogenous Hoxa-1 mRNA in the absence of RA. Twenty-eight candidate genes were identified; these genes encode very diverse proteins, including signaling molecules such as BMP-4, the enzyme superoxide dismutase, the cell adhesion molecule cadherin-6, proteins involved in gene transcription such as HMG-1 and SAP18, homeodomain-containing proteins Gbx-2 and Evx-2, and cell cycle regulatory proteins such as the retinoblastoma binding protein-2. Clone 104 encodes a novel protein; the expression of the clone 104 mRNA is also regulated in a fashion very similar to that of the exogenous Hoxa-1 gene in another F9 cell line, called F9-tet-Hoxa1-8, in which the exogenous Hoxa-1 mRNA expression is tightly regulated by a Tet-off gene expression system. These data strongly suggest that clone 104 is a direct downstream target of the transcription factor Hoxa-1. The cDNA sequence of clone 104 is related to that of human ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase T. Further characterization of these putative Hoxa-1 target genes will aid in delineating the functions of the Hoxa-1 protein in the differentiation processes which occur during embryogenesis. Copyright 2000 Academic Press.
96	NR	10940504	High mobility group (HMG) proteins 1 and 2 are abundant non-histone chromosomal proteins that bind preferentially DNA that is bent or underwound. Previous studies have shown that these proteins preferentially bind to DNA damaged by the crosslinking agents cis-diammine-dichloro-platinum(II), chromium(III) and UV-C radiation. Here we have studied the binding of HMG-1/2 proteins to a duplex oligonucleotide damaged by benzo(a)pyrene diol epoxide or N-acetoxy-acetylaminofluorene using an electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Both chemicals induce monoadducts that are known to distort DNA structure. The affinities of HMG-1/2 for DNA damaged by benzo[a]pyrene diol epoxide or N-acetoxy-acetylaminofluorene were similar to that for UV-irradiated DNA, which were an order of magnitude higher than for undamaged DNA. In contrast, DNA modified by dimethyl sulfate was not preferentially recognised by HMG-1/2.
96	NR	10913248	High-mobility group (HMG) domain proteins bind specifically to the major DNA adducts formed by the anticancer drug cisplatin and can modulate the biological response to this inorganic compound. Stopped-flow fluorescence studies were performed to investigate the kinetics of formation and dissociation of complexes between HMG-domain proteins and a series of 16-mer oligonucleotide probes containing both a 1,2-intrastrand d(GpG) cisplatin cross-link and a fluorescein-modified deoxyuridine residue. Rate constants, activation parameters, and dissociation constants were determined for complexes formed by HMG1 domain A and the platinated DNA probes. The sequence context of the cisplatin adduct modulates the value of the associative rate constant for HMG1 domain A by a factor of 2-4, contributing significantly to differences in binding affinity. The rates of association or dissociation of the protein-DNA complex were similar for a 71 bp platinated DNA analogue. Additional kinetic studies performed with HMG1 domain B, an F37A domain A mutant, and the full-length HMG1 protein highlight differences in the binding properties of the HMG domains. The stopped-flow studies demonstrate the utility of the fluorescein-dU probe in studying protein-DNA complexes. The kinetic data will assist in determining what role these proteins might play in the cisplatin mechanism of action.
96	NR	10882737	The TATA-binding protein (TBP) in the TFIID complex binds specifically to the TATA-box to initiate the stepwise assembly of the preinitiation complex (PIC) for RNA polymerase II transcription. Transcriptional activators and repressors compete with general transcription factors at each step to influence the course of the assembly. To investigate this process, the TBP.TATA complex was titrated with HMG-1 and the interaction monitored by electrophoretic mobility shift assays. The titration produced a ternary HMG-1.TBP. TATA complex, which exhibits increased mobility relative to the TBP. TATA complex. The addition of increasing levels of TFIIB to this complex results in the formation of the TFIIB.TBP.TATA complex. However, in the reverse titration, with very high mole ratios of HMG-1 present, TFIIB is not dissociated off and a complex is formed that contains all factors. The simultaneous addition of E1A to a mixture of TBP and TATA; or HMG-1, TBP, and TATA; or TFIIB, TBP, and TATA inhibits complex formation. On the other hand, E1A added to the pre-established complexes shows a significantly reduced capability to disrupt the complex. In add-back experiments with all complexes, increased levels of TBP re-established the complexes, indicating that the primary target for E1A in all complexes is TBP.
96	NR	10866811	High mobility group (HMG) 1 protein is a highly abundant and an evolutionarily conserved chromosomal protein with two homologous DNA-binding domains (HMG boxes), A and B, attached by a short basic region to an acidic C-terminal tail. The protein has been implicated in a number of fundamental biological processes including DNA replication, transcription, recombination and repair. We demonstrate that HMG1 is able to enhance cohesive-end and blunt-end DNA ligation by T4 DNA ligase via its B domain. The C-terminal flanking sequence of the B domain (seven basic residues out of approximately 18) and a number of conserved amino-acid residues within the HMG box (mainly basic or hydrophobic) are required for efficient stimulation of ligation. Pull-down assays, electron and scanning force microscopy revealed that HMG1 can associate two DNA molecules via their ends even in the absence of complementary overhangs. We propose that HMG1 protein may be involved in the rejoining of DNA breaks by different DNA ligases due to its ability to bring DNA duplexes and their termini into a close proximity while leaving the ends accessible for ligation.
96	NR	10825199	Assembly of enhanceosomes requires architectural proteins to facilitate the DNA conformational changes accompanying cooperative binding of activators to a regulatory sequence. The architectural protein HMG-1 has been proposed to bind DNA in a sequence-independent manner, yet, paradoxically, it facilitates specific DNA binding reactions in vitro. To investigate the mechanism of specificity we explored the effect of HMG-1 on binding of the Epstein-Barr virus activator ZEBRA to a natural responsive promoter in vitro. DNase I footprinting, mutagenesis, and electrophoretic mobility shift assay reveal that HMG-1 binds cooperatively with ZEBRA to a specific DNA sequence between two adjacent ZEBRA recognition sites. This binding requires a strict alignment between two adjacent ZEBRA sites and both HMG boxes of HMG-1. Our study provides the first demonstration of sequence-dependent binding by a nonspecific HMG-box protein. We hypothesize how a ubiquitous, nonspecific architectural protein can function in a specific context through the use of rudimentary sequence recognition coupled with cooperativity. The observation that an abundant architectural protein can bind DNA cooperatively and specifically has implications towards understanding HMG-1's role in mediating DNA transactions in a variety of enzymological systems.
96	NR	10811891	Cisplatin is an anticancer drug that has enjoyed remarkable success against testicular tumors, but dose limiting side-effects have limited its application against a broader range of cancers. Previous studies have shown that high-mobility group (HMG) domain proteins such as HMG1 sensitize cells to cisplatin by shielding its major DNA adducts from nucleotide excision repair. Estrogen treatment increases HMG1 mRNA levels in breast cancer MCF-7 cells. Herein, we describe that treatment of human cancer cells having steroid hormone receptors with the appropriate hormone, estrogen and/or progesterone, significantly increases the potency of cisplatin and its analogue carboplatin by causing the overexpression of HMG1. These findings suggest that the proper combination of these drugs, which are already approved by the Food and Drug Administration, could have potential benefit in treating tumors such as ovarian or breast that carry the hormone receptors.
96	NR	10764654	It has been proposed that vascular angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) plays an important role in regulating vascular growth. Indeed, ACE inhibitors have been reported to prevent neointimal formation after vascular injury in a rat carotid artery model. However, classic pharmacological experiments cannot exclude the potential contributions of hemodynamics and the circulating renin-angiotensin system (RAS). In this study, we used antisense oligodeoxynucleotide (ODN) to obtain local blockade of vascular ACE expression without effects on systemic hemodynamics and circulating RAS. To increase the effectiveness of antisense action, we modified the hemagglutinating virus of Japan-liposome ODN delivery method by cotransfection with nuclear protein (high mobility group 1 [HMG-1]) and RNase H. In vitro experiments showed the enhanced efficacy of antisense ODN by cotransfection of HMG-1 and RNase H compared with ODN alone. In vivo transfection of antisense ACE ODNs into intact uninjured rat carotid artery resulted in a significant reduction of vascular ACE activity, and cotransfection of HMG-1 and RNase H showed further reduction. We examined the effects of local blockade of vascular ACE expression on neointimal formation after vascular injury. Transfection of antisense ACE ODNs resulted in the attenuation of neointimal formation, whereas sense and scrambled ODNs did not. Blood pressure, heart rate, and serum ACE activity were not affected by antisense treatment. The magnitude of vascular ACE inhibition correlated with the suppression of the neointimal size. Overall, this study demonstrates that local antisense ODN inhibition of vascular ACE expression attenuates neointimal formation independent of hemodynamics and circulating RAS. The results support the existence of a functional tissue angiotensin system in the rat vessel wall.
96	NR	10766566	Retropseudogenes are intronless DNA sequences sharing a high degree of homology with the cDNA of their corresponding active genes. They are thought to have originated by reverse transcription of messenger RNA and reintegration of the cDNA into the genome. Usually considered a type of evolutionary waste, they melt into the background of their surrounding DNA by the loss of similarity to the active gene or disappear from the genome by the accumulation of deletions. On the other hand, in this paper we describe the evolutionary recycling of this genomic waste. Recently, a splice variant of the gene encoding the nuclear protein SP100 was identified in which the 3' part of the cDNA is replaced by an alternative exon apparently encoding an HMG1-DNA-binding domain. We were able to show that this HMG box is contributed by a new exon arising from an HMG1 retropseudogene that we have molecularly characterized in detail. In addition to being found in human cells, corresponding fusion transcripts were shown in Pan troglodytes, Gorilla gorilla, and Hylobates lar, but not in Macaca mulatta. Genomic DNA from M. mulatta enabled us to amplify by PCR the 5' part but not the 3' part of the HMG1 retropseudogene. From our data we thus can date the underlying retrotransposition to more than 35 million years ago. Our findings offer a model as to how new exons may evolve during evolution. To our knowledge this is the first example of a retropseudogene becoming part of an active gene in which both parental parts are well characterized and remain in-frame with their cDNA.
96	NR	10747955	Interactions of high mobility group (HMG) domain proteins with DNA modified by cisplatin plays a role in mechanisms underlying its antitumor activity. A structural motif recognized by HMG domain proteins on cisplatin-modified DNA is a stable, directional bend of the helix axis. In the present work, bending induced in DNA by major adducts of a novel class of antitumor compounds, represented by the formula [ inverted question marktrans-PtCl(NH(3))(2) inverted question markH(2)N(CH(2))(2-6)NH(2)]Cl(2), was investigated. The oligodeoxyribonucleotide duplexes containing various site-specific interstrand cross-links of these bifunctional dinuclear platinum drugs were purified and characterized by Maxam-Gilbert footprinting, chemical probing, and phasing assay. It was demonstrated that the cross-links of the dinuclear compounds bent the helix much less than those of cisplatin. Gel retardation assay revealed very weak recognition of DNA adducts of dinuclear complexes by HMG1 protein. Hence, the mediation of antitumor properties of dinuclear platinum complexes by HMG domain proteins is unlikely so that polynuclear platinum compounds may represent a novel class of platinum anticancer drugs acting by a different mechanism than cisplatin and its analogues. A further understanding of how polynuclear platinum compounds modify DNA and how these modifications are processed in cells should provide a rational basis for the design of new platinum drugs rather than searching for cisplatin analogues.
96	NR	10715126	To study the DNA bending induced by non-sequence-specific HMG-1 domain proteins, we have engineered a fusion protein linking the yeast NHP6A with a sequence-specific DNA binding domain, the DNA binding domain of the Hin recombinase, Hin-DBD. A series of biochemical experiments were carried out to characterize the DNA binding property of this fusion protein. Our data showed that the fusion protein not only specifically recognizes a DNA fragment containing the Hin-DBD binding site, but also binds DNA with a higher affinity in comparison with either domain alone. Both domains of the fusion protein are bound to the DNA in juxtaposition. Permutation assays showed that the fusion protein induced a DNA bending at the site of NHP6A binding by an estimated value of 63 degrees. We believe that this experimental design provides an effective vehicle to determine the DNA bending induced by nonspecific HMG-1 proteins.
96	NR	10710428	High-mobility-group proteins HMG-1 and HMG-I/Y bind to multiple sites within a 268 bp A/T-rich enhancer element of the pea plastocyanin gene ( PetE ). Within a 31 bp region of the enhancer, the binding site for HMG-1 overlaps with the binding site for HMG-I/Y. The kinetics of binding and the affinities of HMG-1 and HMG-I/Y for the 31 bp DNA were determined using surface plasmon resonance. Due to very high non-specific interactions of the HMG proteins with a carboxymethyl-dextran matrix, a novel method using a cholesterol tag to anchor the DNA in a supported lipid monolayer on a thin gold film was devised. The phosphatidylcholine monolayer produced a surface that reduced background interactions to a minimum and permitted the measurement of highly reproducible protein-DNA interactions. The association rate constant ( k (a)) of HMG-I/Y with the 31 bp DNA was approximately 5-fold higher than the rate constant for HMG-1, whereas the dissociation constant ( K (D)) for HMG-I/Y (3.1 nM) was approximately 7-fold lower than that for HMG-1 (20.1 nM). This suggests that HMG-I/Y should bind preferentially at the overlapping binding site within this region of the PetE enhancer.
96	NR	10652254	Amphoterin, a major form of HMG (high mobility group) 1 proteins, is highly expressed in immature and malignant cells. A role in cell motility is suggested by the ability of amphoterin to promote neurite extension through RAGE (receptor of advanced glycation end products), an immunoglobulin superfamily member that communicates with the GTPases Cdc42 and Rac. We show here that cell contact with the laminin matrix induces accumulation of both amphoterin mRNA and protein close to the plasma membrane, which is accompanied by extracellular export of amphoterin. A role for amphoterin in extracellular matrix-dependent cell regulation is further suggested by the finding that specific decrease of amphoterin mRNA and protein, using antisense oligonucleotides transfected into cells, inhibits cell migration to laminin in a transfilter assay whereas the oligonucleotides in the culture medium have no effect. Moreover, affinity-purified anti-amphoterin antibodies inhibit cell migration to laminin, supporting an extracellular role for the endogenous amphoterin in cell motility. The finding that amphoterin expression is more pronounced in cells with a motile phenotype as compared to cells of dense cultures, is consistent with the results of the cell migration assays. Our results strongly suggest that amphoterin is a key player in the migration of immature and transformed cells.
96	NR	10626358	We have undertaken the systematic isolation and characterization of mammalian proteins which display an affinity for cisplatin-damaged DNA. Fractionation of human cell extracts has led to the identification of two classes of proteins. The first includes proteins that bind duplex DNA in the absence of cisplatin damage and retain their affinity for DNA in the presence of cisplatin-DNA adducts. The DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) falls into this class. The inhibition of DNA-PK phosphorylation activity by cisplatin-damaged DNA has led to the hypothesis that cisplatin sensitization of mammalian cells to ionizing radiation may be mediated by DNA-PK. The second class of proteins identified are those which display a high relative affinity for cisplatin-damaged DNA and a low affinity for undamaged duplex DNA. Proteins that fall into this class include high mobility group 1 protein (HMG-1), replication protein A (RPA) and xeroderma pigmentosum group A protein (XPA). Each protein has been isolated and purified in the lab. The interaction of each protein with cisplatin-damaged DNA has been assessed in electrophoretic mobility shift assays. A series of DNA binding experiments suggests that RPA binds duplex DNA via denaturation and subsequent preferential binding to the undamaged DNA strand of the partial duplex. DNA substrates prepared with photo-reactive base analogs on either the damaged or undamaged DNA strand have also been employed to investigate the mechanism and specific protein-DNA interactions that occur as each protein binds to cisplatin-damaged DNA. Results suggest both damage and strand specificity for RPA and XPA binding cisplatin-damaged DNA.
96	NR	10610765	We have investigated the nature of the "structure-specific" binding of the tandem A and B HMG boxes of high mobility group protein 1 (HMG1) to four-way junction DNA. AB didomain binding favours the open, planar form of the junction, as shown by reaction with potassium permanganate. Site-directed cleavage of the DNA by a 1, 10-phenanthroline-copper moiety attached to unique natural or engineered cysteine residues in the A or B domain shows that the two linked HMG boxes are not functionally equivalent in four-way junction binding. The A domain of the didomain binds to the centre of the junction, mediating structure-specific binding; the concave surface of the domain interacts with the widened minor groove at the centre, contacting one of the four strands of the junction, and the short arm comprising helices I and II and the connecting loop protrudes into the central hole. The B domain makes contacts along one of the arms, presumably stabilising the binding of the didomain through additional non-sequence-specific interactions. The isolated B domain can, however, bind to the centre of the junction. The preferential binding of the A domain of the AB didomain to the centre correlates with our previous finding of a higher preference of the isolated A domain than of the B domain for this structurally distinct DNA ligand. It is probably at least partly due to the higher positive surface potential in the DNA-binding region of the A domain (in particular to an array of positively charged side-chains suitably positioned to interact with the negatively charged phosphates surrounding the central hole of the junction) and partly to differences in residues corresponding to those that intercalate between bases in other HMG box/DNA complexes. Copyright 1999 Academic Press.
96	NR	10607489	pANCA is a marker antibody expressed in most patients with ulcerative colitis, and its cognate antigen is potentially an immunologic target in this disease. This study evaluates whether pANCA detects an autoantigen that is expressed in the colonic mucosa. Immunohistochemistry of colon specimens with human pANCA monoclonal antibodies (Fab 5-2 and 5-3) revealed a minor population of immunoreactive mucosal cells bearing a cytoplasmic vesicle antigen. By distribution, morphology, and tryptase expression, these were identified as mast cells. Immunofluorescent analysis revealed similar immunoreactivity of mouse mast cell lines and human KU812. Western analysis of mouse mast cell lines revealed immunoreactive proteins, and these were distinct from previously proposed pANCA antigens (histone H1, HMG 1 and 2, and neutrophil vesicle antigens). Cognate antigen for Fab 5-2 and 5-3 was also expressed in other tissue mast cells, cerebellar neurons, and pancreatic islet cells. These findings identify a novel cytoplasmic autoantigen(s) associated with UC by its presence in colonic mucosa and recognition by a disease-associated marker antibody. Copyright 2000 Academic Press.
96	NR	10606643	Formation of the dorsoventral axis in Drosophila melanogaster is mediated through control of the expression of several genes by the morphogen Dorsal. In the ventral part of the embryo Dorsal activates twist and represses zen amongst others. Recently, several proteins have been shown to assist Dorsal in the repression of zen, one of which is DSP1, a HMG box protein that was isolated as a putative co-repressor of Dorsal. In this report we used a DSP1 null mutant to ascertain in vivo the involvement of DSP1 in Dorsal-mediated repression of zen but not in the activation of twist. We show that Dorsal has the ability to interact with DSP1 in vitro as well as with rat HMG1. Using truncated versions of the proteins we located the domains of interaction as being the HMG boxes for DSP1 and HMG1 and the Rel domain for Dorsal. Finally, studies of the zen DNA binding properties of Dorsal and another related Rel protein (Gambif1 from Anopheles gambiae) revealed that their DNA binding affinities were increased in the presence of DSP1 and HMG1.
96	NR	10556030	The high mobility group (HMG) domain is a DNA binding motif found in some eukaryotic chromosomal proteins and transcription factors. This domain binds in the minor groove of DNA inducing a sharp bend and also preferentially binds to certain distorted DNA structures. Although structures of sequence-specific HMG domains with their cognate double-helical DNA binding sites have been solved, the nature of the interaction of the domain with distorted DNA remains to be established. In this study we have investigated the interaction of HMG-D, a Drosophila counterpart of the vertebrate HMG1, with a DNA oligomer containing a bulge of two adenine residues. We show by footprinting that HMG-D binds preferentially on one side of the bulged DNA. Based on these data and on the published NMR structures of the HMG domain of HMG-D and the LEF-1-DNA complex, we modelled the HMG-D - bulged DNA complex. This model predicts that two residues, Val32 and Thr33, in the loop between alpha-helices I and II are inserted deep into the "hole" in the DNA formed by the two missing bases on one strand of the DNA bulge. Mutation of these residues confirmed that both are required for the efficient binding and bending of DNA by HMG-D. We discuss both the role of this loop in the recognition of distorted DNA structures by non-sequence specific HMG domain proteins and that of the basic tail in stabilising the induced DNA bend. Copyright 1999 Academic Press.
96	NR	10508419	The HMG domains of the chromosomal high mobility group proteins homologous to the vertebrate HMG1 and HMG2 proteins preferentially recognize distorted DNA structures. DNA binding also induces a substantial bend. Using fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET), we have determined the changes in the end-to-end distance consequent on the binding of selected insect counterparts of HMG1 to two DNA fragments, one of 18 bp containing a single dA(2) bulge and a second of 27 bp with two dA(2) bulges. The observed changes are consistent with overall bend angles for the complex of the single HMG domain with one bulge and of two domains with two bulges of approximately 90-100 degrees and approximately 180-200 degrees, respectively. The former value contrasts with an inferred value of 150 degrees reported by Heyduk et al. (1) for the bend induced by a single domain. We also observe that the induced bend angle is unaffected by the presence of the C-terminal acidic region. The DNA bend of approximately 95 degrees observed in the HMG domain complexes is similar in magnitude to that induced by the TATA-binding protein (80 degrees), each monomeric unit of the integration host factor (80 degrees), and the LEF-1 HMG domain (107 degrees). We suggest this value may represent a steric limitation on the extent of DNA bending induced by a single DNA-binding motif.
96	NR	10503712	To directly activate specific gene expression, the progesterone receptor must bind to specific hormone response elements in target promoters. We have previously reported that progesterone receptor requires a nuclear factor, high mobility group 1 or 2 (HMG-1/-2) for high-affinity interaction with DNA in vitro and for full transcriptional activity in vivo. We have also observed that HMG-1/-2 selectively influences the activity of the steroid hormone class of nuclear receptors but does not affect other classes of nuclear receptors. This report is a summary of our published and unpublished studies to determine the effects of HMG-1/-2 on a broad range of nuclear receptor supergene family members and to define the mechanism for the specific effect of HMG-1/-2 on the steroid class of receptors. Our studies and available structural data suggest a model where the DNA binding domains of nonsteroid nuclear receptors contain a minor groove DNA interface, termed the C-terminal extension, that contributes to high-affinity DNA binding. Steroid receptors lack such a minor groove interface and therefore require an additional protein, HMG-1/-2, that functionally substitutes for the C-terminal extension to facilitate high-affinity interactions with DNA.
96	NR	10490593	V(D)J recombination is initiated by the specific binding of the RAG1-RAG2 (RAG1/2) complex to the heptamer-nonamer recombination signal sequences (RSS). Several steps of the V(D)J recombination reaction can be reconstituted in vitro with only RAG1/2 plus the high-mobility-group protein HMG1 or HMG2. Here we show that the RAG1 homeodomain directly interacts with both HMG boxes of HMG1 and HMG2 (HMG1,2). This interaction facilitates the binding of RAG1/2 to the RSS, mainly by promoting high-affinity binding to the nonamer motif. Using circular-permutation assays, we found that the RAG1/2 complex bends the RSS DNA between the heptamer and nonamer motifs. HMG1,2 significantly enhance the binding and bending of the 23RSS but are not essential for the formation of a bent DNA intermediate on the 12RSS. A transient increase of HMG1,2 concentration in transfected cells increases the production of the final V(D)J recombinants in vivo.
96	NR	10485885	We show that the Drosophila protein DSP1, an HMG-1/2-like protein, binds DNA highly cooperatively with three members of the Rel family of transcriptional regulators (NF-kappaB, the p50 subunit of NF-kappaB, and the Rel domain of Dorsal). This cooperativity is apparent with DNA molecules bearing consensus Rel-protein-binding sites and is unaffected by the presence of a negative regulatory element, a sequence previously proposed to be important for mediating repression by these Rel proteins. The cooperativity observed in these DNA-binding assays is paralleled by interactions between protein pairs in the absence of DNA. We also show that in HeLa cells, as assayed by transient transfection, expression of DSP1 increases activation by Dorsal from the twist promoter and inhibits that activation from the zen promoter, consistent with the previously proposed idea that DSP1 can affect the action of Dorsal in a promoter-specific fashion.
96	NR	10555574	The compound [Pt(lysine)Cl2] (Kplatin) was previously identified in a study of platinum amino acid complexes as a potential antitumor drug candidate. The DNA binding properties, high mobility group (HMG)-domain protein affinity for the platinated DNA, and cytotoxicity against HeLa cells of Kplatin and three related (N,O) chelated platinum(II) amino acid complexes, [Pt(arginine)Cl2] (Rplatin), K[Pt(Nepsilon-acetyllysine)Cl2] (NacKplatin), and K[Pt(norleucine)Cl2] (Norplatin), are reported. The four complexes have identical PtCl2(N,O) coordination environments. A new solid phase screening methodology was devised in which platinated DNA probes are covalently attached to a nylon support and tested for their ability to bind a fluorescently labeled HMG-domain protein. The fluorescent HMG-domain protein was generated by expressing a fusion of the green fluorescent protein (GFP) with recombinant rat HMG1. Binding revealed by the solid phase method correlated well with the results of gel mobility shift and HeLa cytotoxicity assays. These results suggest that the net charge on the complex, rather than the nature of the side chain, is the most important factor underlying the DNA binding properties and toxicity of amino acid (N,O) chelated platinum complexes. This property explains why Kplatin was previously selected from the pool of platinum amino acid complexes based on the ability of its DNA adducts to bind HMG1.
96	NR	10455911	BACKGROUND: Cytokines mediate the metabolic and physiologic responses to injury and infection. Anterior pituitary cells express receptors for tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and interleukin 1 (IL-1), which can signal these cells to release corticotropin, growth hormone, and cytokines such as IL-1 and macrophage migration inhibitory factor. This interaction provides an important link between the immune system and the neuroendocrine system. We reasoned that pituicytes activated with TNF or IL-1 might release previously unrecognized factors that could participate in this signaling from the neuroendocrine to the immune system. METHODS: Proteins released from rat pituicytes (GH3) after stimulation with proinflammatory cytokines were identified by N-terminal amino acid sequencing. Polyclonal antibodies against a peptide corresponding to the N-terminal amino acid sequence were generated and used to determine the kinetics of protein release. RESULTS: Cytokine stimulation induced the release of a 30-kd protein from rat pituicytes. After the protein was isolated and the N-terminal amino acid sequence determined, a protein database analysis revealed that it is high mobility group-1 (HMG-1) protein. TNF and IL-1 induced the release of HMG-1 from pituicytes in a time- and dose-dependent manner. Interferon gamma alone did not induce the release of HMG-1, but it enhanced TNF-induced HMG-1 release. CONCLUSION: Stimulation of pituicytes by TNF or IL-1 induces the release of HMG-1, which may participate in the regulation of neuroendocrine and immune responses to infection or injury.
96	NR	10451712	Several cytogenetic subgroups with characteristic lesions involving chromosomal regions 12q14-15, 6p21.3, or 13q12 can be distinguished in lipomas. Rearrangements of the HMGIC gene have been described in cases with 12q14-15 abnormalities, whereas HMGIY has been shown to be the target gene of 6p21.3 aberrations. Recently, HMG1, another member of the HMG family, was mapped to 13q12. The aim of this study was to investigate the possible role of HMG1 aberrations in lipomas with 13q12 abnormalities. Two PAC clones containing HMG1 were isolated. By molecular cytogenetic investigations using these PAC clones and by Southern blot analysis of eight lipomas with 13q12 abnormalities, we were able to show that these chromosomal rearrangements did not result in intragenic rearrangements of HMG1 or breakpoints close to it.
96	NR	10405332	The active component in bovine milk on the proliferation of osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells was purified and identified. Growth-promoting activity was measured by [(3)H]thymidine incorporation on the cell. The molecular weight of the purified protein was 10 kDa. The amino-terminal sequence of this 10-kDa protein was identical to bovine high mobility group protein (HMG) 1. This 10-kDa protein is suggested to be a basic protein and to have an HMG box, a consensus sequence motif among the HMG family. From these results, we named this protein HMG-like protein. HMG is a ubiquitous nonhistone component of chromatin and considered to be implicated in DNA replication. We found this protein in milk, and it showed a growth-promoting activity. We propose the possibility that HMG-like protein existed in milk and plays an important role for neonate in bone formation by activating osteoblasts. Copyright 1999 Academic Press.
96	NR	10400623	The high mobility group (HMG) 1 and 2 proteins are the most abundant non-histone components of chromosomes. Here, we report that essentially the entire pool of HMG1 proteins in Drosophila embryos and Chironomus cultured cells is phosphorylated at multiple serine residues located within acidic tails of these proteins. The phosphorylation sites match the consensus phosphorylation site of casein kinase II. Electrospray ionization mass spectroscopic analyses revealed that Drosophila HMGD and Chironomus HMG1a and HMG1b are double-phosphorylated and that Drosophila HMGZ is triple-phosphorylated. The importance of this post-translational modification was studied by comparing some properties of the native and in vitro dephosphorylated proteins. It was found that dephosphorylation affects the conformation of the proteins and decreases their conformational and metabolic stability. Moreover, it weakens binding of the proteins to four-way junction DNA by 2 orders of magnitude, whereas the strength of binding to linear DNA remains unchanged. Based on these observations, we propose that the detected phosphorylation is important for the proper function and turnover rates of these proteins. As the occurrence of acidic tails containing canonical casein kinase II phosphorylation sites is common to diverse HMG and other chromosomal proteins, our results are probably of general significance.
96	NR	10398600	Endotoxin, a constituent of Gram-negative bacteria, stimulates macrophages to release large quantities of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and interleukin-1 (IL-1), which can precipitate tissue injury and lethal shock (endotoxemia). Antagonists of TNF and IL-1 have shown limited efficacy in clinical trials, possibly because these cytokines are early mediators in pathogenesis. Here a potential late mediator of lethality is identified and characterized in a mouse model. High mobility group-1 (HMG-1) protein was found to be released by cultured macrophages more than 8 hours after stimulation with endotoxin, TNF, or IL-1. Mice showed increased serum levels of HMG-1 from 8 to 32 hours after endotoxin exposure. Delayed administration of antibodies to HMG-1 attenuated endotoxin lethality in mice, and administration of HMG-1 itself was lethal. Septic patients who succumbed to infection had increased serum HMG-1 levels, suggesting that this protein warrants investigation as a therapeutic target.
96	NR	10393186	Lineage specificity and temporal ordering of immunoglobulin (Ig) and T-cell receptor (TCR) gene rearrangement are reflected in the accessibility of recombination signal sequences (RSSs) within chromatin to in vitro cleavage by the V(D)J recombinase. In this report, we investigated the basis of this regulation by testing the ability of purified RAG1 and RAG2 proteins to initiate cleavage on positioned nucleosomes containing RSS substrates. We found that nicking and double-strand DNA cleavage of RSSs positioned on the face of an unmodified nucleosome are entirely inhibited. This inhibition was independent of translational position or rotational phase and could not be overcome either by addition of the DNA-bending protein HMG-1 or by the use of hyperacetylated histones. We suggest that the nucleosome could act as the stable unit of chromatin which limits recombinase accessibility to potential RSS targets, and that actively rearranging gene segments might be packaged in a modified or disrupted nucleosome structure.
96	NR	10385126	The anticancer activity of cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) (cisplatin) arises from its ability to damage DNA, with the major adducts formed being intrastrand d(GpG) and d(ApG) crosslinks. These crosslinks bend and unwind the duplex, and the altered structure attracts high-mobility-group domain (HMG) and other proteins. This binding of HMG-domain proteins to cisplatin-modified DNA has been postulated to mediate the antitumour properties of the drug. Many HMG-domain proteins recognize altered DNA structures such as four-way junctions and cisplatin-modified DNA, but until now the molecular basis for this recognition was unknown. Here we describe mutagenesis, hydroxyl-radical footprinting and X-ray studies that elucidate the structure of a 1:1 cisplatin-modified DNA/HMG-domain complex. Domain A of the structure-specific HMG-domain protein HMG1 binds to the widened minor groove of a 16-base-pair DNA duplex containing a site-specific cis-[Pt(NH3)2[d(GpG)-N7(1),-N7(2)]] adduct. The DNA is strongly kinked at a hydrophobic notch created at the platinum-DNA crosslink and protein binding extends exclusively to the 3' side of the platinated strand. A phenylalanine residue at position 37 intercalates into a hydrophobic notch created at the platinum crosslinked d(GpG) site and binding of the domain is dramatically reduced in a mutant in which alanine is substituted for phenylalanine at this position.
96	NR	10366723	Previous studies of the 25 kDa high mobility group-1 (HMG-1) protein have generated conflicting results regarding whether HMG-1 exists as a monomer or is capable of oligomerizing to (functional) tetramers. To resolve this question, sedimentation velocity analysis yielded a s20,w value of 2.59S, which is consistent with a monomeric protein. Equilibrium sedimentation data were obtained for three HMG-1 concentrations at two rotor speeds. The six sets of data were fit to both an ideal single component and monomer-dimer equilibrium model, with essentially identical fits produced for both models, with the latter indicating a low extent (7%) of dimerization. Reaction of HMG-1 with glutaraldehyde produced a small population of oligomers consistent with a low level of dimers. This supported the monomer-dimer equilibrium model. Surprisingly, gel permeation chromatography yielded an apparent molecular mass of approx. 55 kDa for both HMG-1 and HMG-2. This finding is considered anomalous and presumably due to the high negative charge density in the C terminus of HMG-1. The sedimentation data also permit one to model HMG-1 as a hydrated prolate ellipsoid with a major axis/minor axis ratio of 2. 79. The collective evidence from the sedimentation and chemical cross-linking studies strongly supports a moderately asymmetric monomer in solution and unequivocally eliminates the possibility of a highly extended shape for HMG-1 or the existence of any extensive oligomerization.
96	NR	10347218	Chromosomal translocations involving genes coding for members of the HMG-I(Y) family of "high mobility group" non-histone chromatin proteins (HMG-I, HMG-Y, and HMG-IC) have been observed in numerous types of human tumors. Many of these gene rearrangements result in the creation of chimeric proteins in which the DNA-binding domains of the HMG-I(Y) proteins, the so-called A.T-hook motifs, have been fused to heterologous peptide sequences. Although little is known about either the structure or biophysical properties of these naturally occurring fusion proteins, the suggestion has been made that such chimeras have probably assumed an altered in vivo DNA-binding specificity due to the presence of the A.T-hook motifs. To investigate this possibility, we performed in vitro "domain-swap" experiments using a model protein fusion system in which a single A. T-hook peptide was exchanged for a corresponding length peptide in the well characterized "B-box" DNA-binding domain of the HMG-1 non-histone chromatin protein. Here we report that chimeric A. T-hook/B-box hybrids exhibit in vitro DNA-binding characteristics resembling those of wild type HMG-I(Y) protein, rather than the HMG-1 protein. These results strongly suggest that the chimeric fusion proteins produced in human tumors as a result of HMG-I(Y) gene chromosomal translocations also retain A.T-hook-imparted DNA-binding properties in vivo.
96	DR	10323891	NA
96	NR	10228169	NHP6A is a chromatin-associated protein from Saccharomyces cerevisiae belonging to the HMG1/2 family of non-specific DNA binding proteins. NHP6A has only one HMG DNA binding domain and forms relatively stable complexes with DNA. We have determined the solution structure of NHP6A and constructed an NMR-based model structure of the DNA complex. The free NHP6A folds into an L-shaped three alpha-helix structure, and contains an unstructured 17 amino acid basic tail N-terminal to the HMG box. Intermolecular NOEs assigned between NHP6A and a 15 bp 13C,15N-labeled DNA duplex containing the SRY recognition sequence have positioned the NHP6A HMG domain onto the minor groove of the DNA at a site that is shifted by 1 bp and in reverse orientation from that found in the SRY-DNA complex. In the model structure of the NHP6A-DNA complex, the N-terminal basic tail is wrapped around the major groove in a manner mimicking the C-terminal tail of LEF1. The DNA in the complex is severely distorted and contains two adjacent kinks where side chains of methionine and phenylalanine that are important for bending are inserted. The NHP6A-DNA model structure provides insight into how this class of architectural DNA binding proteins may select preferential binding sites.
96	NR	10219086	Histone H1, HMG-1 and HMG-I(Y) are mammalian nuclear proteins possessing distinctive DNA-binding domain structures that share the common property of preferentially binding to four-way junction (4H) DNA, an in vitro mimic of the in vivo genetic recombination intermediate known as the Holliday junction. Nevertheless, these three proteins bind to 4H DNA in vitro with very different affinities and in a mutually exclusive manner. To investigate the molecular basis for these distinctive binding characteristics, we employed base pair resolution hydroxyl radical footprinting to determine the precise sites of nucleotide interactions of both HMG-1 and histone H1 on 4H DNA and compared these contacts with those previously described for HMG-I(Y) on the same substrate. Each of these proteins had a unique binding pattern on 4H DNA and yet shared certain common nucleotide contacts on the arms of the 4H DNA molecule near the branch point. Both the HMG-I(Y) and HMG-1 proteins made specific contacts across the 4H DNA branch point, as well as interacting at discrete sites on the arms, whereas the globular domain of histone H1 bound exclusively to the arms of the 4H DNA substrate without contacting nucleotides at the crossover region. Experiments employing the chemical cleavage reagent 1, 10-orthophenanthroline copper(II) attached to the C-terminal end of a site-specifically mutagenized HMG-I(Y) protein molecule demonstrated that this protein binds to 4H DNA in a distinctly polar, direction-specific manner. Together these results provide an attractive molecular explanation for the observed mutually exclusive 4H DNA-binding characteristics of these proteins and also allow for critical assessment of proposed models for their interaction with 4H DNA substrates. The results also have important implications concerning the possible in vivo roles of HMG-I(Y), histone H1 and HMG-1 in biological processes such as genetic recombination and retroviral integration.
96	NR	10212205	The high mobility group (HMG) domain is a DNA-binding motif found in the non-histone chromosomal proteins, HMG1 and HMG2, and some transcription factors. Experimental evidence has demonstrated that HMG-domain proteins can play a role in sensitizing cells to the anticancer drug cisplatin. Fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) experiments were performed in the present study to investigate structural changes that accompany complex formation between the HMG domain B of HMG1 and a cisplatin-modified, 20-base pair double-stranded DNA probe containing fluorescein and rhodamine tethered at its two ends. The binding affinity of HMG1 domain B for the cisplatin-modified DNA probe was investigated in fluorescence titration experiments, and a value of 60 +/- 30 nM was determined for the dissociation constant. Single photon counting methods were employed to measure the fluorescence lifetime of the fluorescein donor in the presence and absence of HMG1 domain B. These FRET experiments revealed a distance change that was used to estimate a bend angle of 80-95 degrees for the cisplatin-modified DNA upon protein binding. Stopped-flow fluorescence spectroscopic experiments afforded kinetic parameters for HMG1 domain B binding to the cisplatin-modified DNA probe, with kon = 1.1 +/- 0.1 x 10(9) M-1 s-1 and koff = 30 +/- 4 s-1.
96	NR	10197987	We show that during Caenorhabditis elegans male spicule development, the specification of a glial versus neuronal cell fate in a canonical neurogenic sublineage is dependent on Wnt signaling. Inactivation of a Wnt signaling pathway mediated by the Wnt receptor LIN-17 transforms the SPD sheath cell into its sister, the SPD neuron. We discovered a new mutant, son-1, that displays this same cell fate transformation. The son-1 mutation enhances the phenotypes of reduction-of-function lin-17 mutants in several developmental processes, including vulva development, somatic gonad development, and male tail patterning. son-1 encodes an HMG1/2-like DNA-binding protein and is localized in all cell nuclei through development as revealed by a GFP reporter construct. Disruption of son-1 function by RNA-mediated interference results in the same spicule defect as caused by overexpression of POP-1, a TCF/LEF class HMG protein known to act downstream of the Wnt signaling pathway. Our results provide in vivo evidence for the functional involvement of an HMG1/2-like protein, SON-1, in Wnt signaling. The sequence nonspecific HMG protein SON-1 and the sequence specific HMG protein POP-1 might both act in the Wnt responding cells to regulate gene transcription in opposite directions.
96	NR	10194768	Estrogen receptor (ER) toxicity has hampered the development of vertebrate cell lines stably expressing substantial levels of recombinant wild-type ER. To isolate clonal lines of HeLa cells stably expressing epitope-tagged ER, we used a construction encoding a single bicistronic mRNA, in which FLAG-epitope-tagged human ER alpha (fER) was translated from a 5'-translation initiation site and fused to the neomycin resistance gene, which was translated from an internal ribosome entry site. One stable HeLa-ER-positive cell line (HeLa-ER1) produces 1,300,000 molecules of fER/cell (approximately 20-fold more ER than MCF-7 cells). The HeLa fER is biologically active in vivo, as judged by rapid death of the cells in the presence of either 17 beta-estradiol or trans-hydroxytamoxifen and the ability of the cell line to activate a transfected estrogen response element (ERE)-containing reporter gene. The FLAG-tagged ER was purified to near homogeneity in a single step by immunoaffinity chromatography with anti-FLAG monoclonal antibody. Purified fER exhibited a distribution constant (KD) for 17 beta-estradiol of 0.45 nM. Purified HeLa fER and HeLa fER in crude nuclear extracts exhibit similar KD values for the ERE (0.8 nM and 1 nM, respectively), which are approximately 10 times lower than the KD of 10 nM we determined for purified ER expressed using the baculovirus system. HMG-1 strongly stimulated binding of both crude and purified HeLa fER to the ERE (KD of 0.25 nM). In transfected HeLa cells, HMG-1 exhibited a dose-dependent stimulation of 17 beta-estradiol-dependent transactivation. At high levels of transfected HMG-1 expression plasmid, transactivation by ER became partially ligand-independent, and transactivation by trans-hydroxytamoxifen was increased by more than 25-fold. These data describe a system in which ER, stably expressed in HeLa cells and easily purified, exhibits extremely high affinity for the ERE, and suggest that intracellular levels of HMG-1 may be limiting for ER action.
96	NR	10082527	Two coordinate forms of transcriptional synergy mediate eukaryotic gene regulation: the greater-than-additive transcriptional response to multiple promoter-bound activators, and the sigmoidal response to increasing activator concentration. The mechanism underlying the sigmoidal response has not been elucidated but is almost certainly founded on the cooperative binding of activators and the general machinery to DNA. Here we explore that mechanism by using highly purified transcription factor preparations and a strong Epstein-Barr virus promoter, BHLF-1, regulated by the virally encoded activator ZEBRA. We demonstrate that two layers of cooperative binding govern transcription complex assembly. First, the architectural proteins HMG-1 and -2 mediate cooperative formation of an enhanceosome containing ZEBRA and cellular Sp1. This enhanceosome then recruits transcription factor IIA (TFIIA) and TFIID to the promoter to form the DA complex. The DA complex, however, stimulates assembly of the enhanceosome itself such that the entire reaction can occur in a highly concerted manner. The data reveal the importance of reciprocal cooperative interactions among activators and the general machinery in eukaryotic gene regulation.
96	NR	10074149	We have reconstituted concerted human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) integration in vitro with specially designed mini-donor HIV-1 DNA, a supercoiled plasmid acceptor, purified bacterium-derived HIV-1 integrase (IN), and host HMG protein family members. This system is comparable to one previously described for avian sarcoma virus (ASV) (A. Aiyar et al., J. Virol. 70:3571-3580, 1996) that was stimulated by the presence of HMG-1. Sequence analyses of individual HIV-1 integrants showed loss of 2 bp from the ends of the donor DNA and almost exclusive 5-bp duplications of the acceptor DNA at the site of integration. All of the integrants sequenced were inserted into different sites in the acceptor. These are the features associated with integration of viral DNA in vivo. We have used the ASV and HIV-1 reconstituted systems to compare the mechanism of concerted DNA integration and examine the role of different HMG proteins in the reaction. Of the three HMG proteins examined, HMG-1, HMG-2, and HMG-I(Y), the products formed in the presence of HMG-I(Y) for both systems most closely match those observed in vivo. Further analysis of HMG-I(Y) mutants demonstrates that the stimulation of integration requires an HMG-I(Y) domain involved in DNA binding. While complexes containing HMG-I(Y), ASV IN, and donor DNA can be detected in gel shift experiments, coprecipitation experiments failed to demonstrate stable interactions between HMG-I(Y) and ASV IN or between HMG-I(Y) and HIV-1 IN.
96	NR	9990140	High mobility group (HMG) protein 1 contains two DNA binding motifs, called HMG1/2-boxes, linked with a linker region. The functional relationships between the two boxes and the mechanism of involvement of the linker region for effective binding of HMG1 were examined. The binding analyses of truncated HMG1 peptides with DNA indicated that the structural array of two boxes stabilizes the interaction of HMG1 with DNA. The mutation analyses of the linker region suggested that the region is equipped with tolerance for the deletion of a few amino acid residues to allow appropriate binding of the two boxes with DNA, and that the basic cluster in the linker sequence is in a position to interact with DNA. The existence of tolerance for the linker sequence was found to be conserved during the evolution of HMG1 protein homologues. A structural model for array of two boxes associating with DNA minor groove was constructed on the basis of the experimental results and energy minimization. The model proposes that the DNA binding region in HMG1 covers an 18 bp DNA region and induces its bending by about 140 degrees. The linker region may function to maintain the structural array of two HMG1/2-boxes by direct interaction with DNA.
96	NR	9973607	Sp100 and PML are interferon-inducible proteins associated with a new class of nuclear domains (known as nuclear dots or PML bodies) which play a role in tumorigenesis, virus infections, and autoimmunity. While PML is extensively alternatively spliced, only two splice variants are known for Sp100. Here we describe the identification and characterization of several Sp100 splice variant proteins and support their existence by elucidation of the 3'-end of the Sp100 gene. Some of the splice variants contain a domain of significant sequence similarity with two previously described highly related interferon-inducible nuclear phosphoproteins as well as to suppressin and DEAF-1, which altogether define a novel protein motif, termed HNPP-box. One class of splice variants contains an almost complete and highly conserved copy of the DNA-binding high mobility group 1 protein sequence and thus represent novel HMG-box proteins. When expressed transiently, both major classes of Sp100 splice variant proteins localize in part to nuclear dots/PML bodies and in addition to different nuclear domains. Furthermore, PML was occasionally redistributed. These data indicate that alternatively spliced Sp100 proteins are expressed, differ in part in localization from Sp100, and might bind to chromatin via the HMG domain.
96	NR	9931456	Screening of cDNA libraries for the homologous vertebrate proteins high mobility group (HMG) 1 and 2 using DNA probes based on the coding sequences is likely to result in isolation of both HMG1 and HMG2 clones, as well as pseudogenes, which may be transcribed at low levels. However, the 3'-untranslated regions (UTRs) of HMG1 and 2 are quite distinct, and unusually conserved across species. We have used this property to select the true chicken HMG1 cDNA clone from a chicken lymphocyte cDNA library in lambdagt11, using a probe based on the 3'-UTR of rat HMG1 cDNA. The chicken HMG1 cDNA clone is very similar to all the complete HMG1 cDNA clones isolated so far. We suggest that the sequence designated chicken HMG1 in the GenBank Data Library (Accession number D14314) is, in fact, that of HMG2a [and moreover that the recently reported mouse clone (Accession number AF022465), proposed to encode a new HMG protein, HMG4, is also likely to encode an HMG2a, based on the translated amino-acid sequence and 3'-UTR]. We also report much improved expression of intact recombinant HMG1 in Escherichia coli by the use of chloramphenicol rather than ampicillin selection and conditions that limit cell growth. This should be general for all members of the HMG1 (and 2) family which may be toxic to cells (possibly because of the long acidic tail), and may also prove useful in the production of other such proteins.
96	NR	9888798	High mobility group (HMG) 2 is a sequence-nonspecific DNA-binding protein consisting of a repeat of DNA-binding domains called HMG1/2 boxes A and B and an acidic C-terminal. To understand the mode of HMG2 interaction with DNA, we expressed various HMG2 peptides containing HMG1/2 box(es) in Escherichia coli cells and purified them. Gel retardation and DNA supercoiling assay indicated that the region essential for the preferential binding of HMG2 with negatively supercoiled DNA and DNA unwinding activity is located in box B, but not sufficient alone. The flanking C-terminal basic region or box A linked by a linker region is necessary to express activities. The SPR measurements certified that the intrinsic DNA binding affinity of box B is weaker (Kd = 170 microM), and these adjoining regions largely strengthen the affinity (Kd </= 1.2 microM). In contrast, box A, even in the presence of the adjoining basic linker region, showed no such activities, indicating that boxes A and B are different in their DNA recognition mode. The computer modeling suggested that the side chain of Phe-102 in box B is inserted into the base stack to cause DNA conformational changes, while the side chain of Ala-16 in box A is too small to intercalate. These represent that boxes A and B have similar tertiary structures but their activities for DNA conformational changes obviously differ. Box B is the main region for DNA recognition and conformational changes, and box A must play an assistant to increase its DNA recognition.
96	NR	9883584	DSP1 is an HMG-box containing protein of Drosophila melanogaster which was first identified as a co-repressor of the Dorsal protein. Recently, the analysis of the structure of the gene has led us to propose that DSP1 is the Drosophila equivalent of the ubiquitous vertebrate HMG 1/2 proteins. In the present paper, the patterns of expression of DSP1 protein and RNA in adult flies and during development are reported. In the adults DSP1 protein is located in nurse cells of ovaries and in brain. During eggs development uniform expression of DSP1 protein persists until the end of germband retraction. At later stages, expression is restricted to the ventral nerve chord and brain. Using P-element mutagenesis, we have isolated a mutant deficient in DSP1 functions. Genetic studies of this mutant show that DSP1 protein is essential for the growth and the development of Drosophila. In addition to be a co-repressor of the transcriptional activator Dorsal our results provide compelling evidence that DSP1 is a regulator involved in several pathways necessary for the development of the fly.
96	NR	9880542	The high mobility group (HMG) box domain has defined a family of proteins, mostly transcription factors, that specifically interacts with DNA on the minor groove and sharply bends it. The founding member of the family, HMG1, does not specifically recognize regular B-DNA but is recruited to DNA by interaction with other transcription factors and TATA box-binding protein (TBP). However, conflicting effects of HMG1 on transcription have been reported. We show that the interaction between HMG1 and TBP is species-specific. This interaction in turn affects the interaction of TBP with transcription factor (TF) IIB and is competed by TFIIA. A primary binding site was mapped to the H2' alpha-helix in the highly conserved core domain of human TBP. On HMG1, the primary binding site was only in the HMG box A, and HMG box A was also sufficient to interact with native TFIID. Both HMG boxes efficiently repressed transcription in vitro as fusions to the Gal4-DNA binding domain. Additionally, HMG box B showed a weak level of activation at very low amounts. These results suggest a general involvement of HMG1 at the early stages of polymerase II transcription that may result in subtle activation or repression of individual genes.
96	NR	0009880344	Regulation of isoprenoid end-product synthesis required for normal growth and development in plants is not well understood. To investigate the extent to which specific genes for the enzyme 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase (HMGR) are involved in end-product regulation, we manipulated expression of the HMG1 and HMG2 genes in tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) fruit using arachidonic acid (AA). In developing young fruit AA blocked fruit growth, inhibited HMG1, and activated HMG2 expression. These results are consistent with other reports indicating that HMG1 expression is closely correlated with growth processes requiring phytosterol production. In mature-green fruit AA strongly induced the expression of HMG2, PSY1 (the gene for phytoene synthase), and lycopene accumulation before the normal onset of carotenoid synthesis and ripening. The induction of lycopene synthesis was not blocked by inhibition of HMGR activity using mevinolin, suggesting that cytoplasmic HMGR is not required for carotenoid synthesis. Our results are consistent with the function of an alternative plastid isoprenoid pathway (the Rohmer pathway) that appears to direct the production of carotenoids during tomato fruit ripening.
96	NR	9722660	The DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) holoenzyme consists of a 470-kDa catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs), a DNA-binding regulatory component known as Ku protein, and double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) with ends. We previously reported that the activity of DNA-PK in vitro is stimulated by non-histone chromosomal high mobility group proteins (HMG) 1 and 2 comprising two similar repeats, termed domains A and B, and an acidic C-terminal. Here we demonstrate that in vitro HMG1 and 2 can completely replace Ku protein as the DNA-binding regulatory component of DNA-PK. DNA-PKcs and Ku protein were separately purified from Raji nuclear extracts, and reconstituted into the DNA-PK holoenzyme in the presence of dsDNA. DNA-PKcs alone catalyzed DNA-dependent phosphorylation at a very low but significant level, and HMG1 and 2 markedly stimulated the phosphorylation of alpha-casein and a specific peptide substrate in a DNA-dependent manner. The HMG2-domains (A+B) polypeptide devoid of the C-terminal acidic region was more effective for DNA-PKcs stimulation than the full-length HMG2, and HMG2-domain A and -domain B polypeptides. Anti(Ku protein) antibodies inhibited the DNA-dependent phosphorylation activity of the DNA-PKcs:Ku protein complex, but not that of DNA-PKcs alone or when it was complexed with HMG1 or 2. These results demonstrate that HMG1 and 2 can function as the DNA-binding regulatory component for DNA-PKcs in vitro, and imply that a conformational change of dsDNA, which is elicited by regulatory components, is important for the stimulation of DNA-PK activity of DNA-PKcs.
96	NR	9675905	In contrast to other eukaryotes which usually express two closely related HMG1-like proteins, plant cells have multiple relatively variable proteins of this type. A systematic analysis of the DNA-binding properties of four chromosomal HMG domain proteins from maize revealed that they bind linear DNA with similar affinity. HMGa, HMGc1/2 and HMGd specifically recognise diverse DNA structures such as DNA mini-circles and supercoiled DNA. They induce DNA-bending, and constrain negative superhelical turns in DNA. In the presence of DNA, the HMG domain proteins can self-associate, whereas they are monomeric in solution. The maize HMG1-like proteins have the ability to facilitate the formation of nucleoprotein structures to different extents, since they can efficiently replace a bacterial chromatin-associated protein required for the site-specific beta-mediated recombination. A variable function of the HMG1-like proteins is indicated by their differential association with maize chromatin, as judged by their 'extractability' from chromatin with spermine and ethidium bromide. Collectively, these findings suggest that the various plant chromosomal HMG domain proteins could be adapted to act in different nucleoprotein structures in vivo.
96	NR	9671457	We previously reported that the chromatin high-mobility group protein 1 (HMG-1) enhances the sequence-specific DNA binding activity of progesterone receptor (PR) in vitro, thus providing the first evidence that HMG-1 may have a coregulatory role in steroid receptor-mediated gene transcription. Here we show that HMG-1 and the highly related HMG-2 stimulate DNA binding by other steroid receptors, including estrogen, androgen, and glucocorticoid receptors, but have no effect on DNA binding by several nonsteroid nuclear receptors, including retinoid acid receptor (RAR), retinoic X receptor (RXR), and vitamin D receptor (VDR). As highly purified recombinant full-length proteins, all steroid receptors tested exhibited weak binding affinity for their optimal palindromic hormone response elements (HREs), and the addition of purified HMG-1 or -2 substantially increased their affinity for HREs. Purified RAR, RXR, and VDR also exhibited little to no detectable binding to their cognate direct repeat HREs but, in contrast to results with steroid receptors, the addition of HMG-1 or HMG-2 had no stimulatory effect. Instead, the addition of purified RXR enhanced RAR and VDR DNA binding through a heterodimerization mechanism and HMG-1 or HMG-2 had no further effect on DNA binding by RXR-RAR or RXR-VDR heterodimers. HMG-1 and HMG-2 (HMG-1/-2) themselves do not bind to progesterone response elements, but in the presence of PR they were detected as part of an HMG-PR-DNA ternary complex. HMG-1/-2 can also interact transiently in vitro with PR in the absence of DNA; however, no direct protein interaction was detected with VDR. These results, taken together with the fact that PR can bend its target DNA and that HMG-1/-2 are non-sequence-specific DNA binding proteins that recognize DNA structure, suggest that HMG-1/-2 are recruited to the PR-DNA complex by the combined effect of transient protein interaction and DNA bending. In transient-transfection assays, coexpression of HMG-1 or HMG-2 increased PR-mediated transcription in mammalian cells by as much as 7- to 10-fold without altering the basal promoter activity of target reporter genes. This increase in PR-mediated gene activation by coexpression of HMG-1/-2 was observed in different cell types and with different target promoters, suggesting a generality to the functional interaction between HMG-1/-2 and PR in vivo. Cotransfection of HMG-1 also increased reporter gene activation mediated by other steroid receptors, including glucocorticoid and androgen receptors, but it had a minimal influence on VDR-dependent transcription in vivo. These results support the conclusion that HMG-1/-2 are coregulatory proteins that increase the DNA binding and transcriptional activity of the steroid hormone class of receptors but that do not functionally interact with certain nonsteroid classes of nuclear receptors.
96	NR	9654080	High-mobility-group protein 1 (HMG1) is a conserved chromosomal protein with two homologous DNA-binding HMG-box domains, A and B, linked by a short basic region to an acidic carboxy-terminal tail. NMR spectroscopy on the free didomain (AB) shows that the two HMG boxes do not interact. The didomain has a higher affinity for all DNA substrates tested than single HMG-box domains and has a significantly higher ability to distort DNA by bending and supercoiling. The interaction of the didomain with DNA is stabilized by the presence of the basic region (approximately 20 residues, 9 of which are Lys) that links the second HMG box to the acidic tail in intact HMG1; this may be, at least in part, why this region also enhances supercoiling of relaxed circular DNA by the didomain and circularization of short DNA fragments (in the presence of ligase). Competition assays suggest significantly different structure-specific preferences of single and tandem HMG boxes for four-way junction and supercoiled plasmid DNA. Binding to supercoiled DNA appears to be promoted by protein oligomerization, which is pronounced for the didomains. Electron microscopy suggests that the oligomers are globular aggregates, associated with DNA looping. One box versus two (or several) is likely to be an important determinant of the properties of (non-sequence specific) HMG-box proteins.
96	NR	9636146	The PML/SP100 nuclear bodies (NBs) were first described as discrete subnuclear structures containing the SP100 protein. Subsequently, they were shown to contain the PML protein which is part of the oncogenic PML-RARalpha hybrid produced by the t(15;17) chromosomal translocation characteristic of acute promyelocytic leukemia. Yet, the physiological role of these nuclear bodies remains unknown. Here, we show that SP100 binds to members of the heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) families of non-histone chromosomal proteins. Further, we demonstrate that a naturally occurring splice variant of SP100, here called SP100-HMG, is a member of the high mobility group-1 (HMG-1) protein family and may thus possess DNA-binding potential. Both HP1 and SP100-HMG concentrate in the PML/SP100 NBs, and overexpression of SP100 leads to enhanced accumulation of endogenous HP1 in these structures. When bound to a promoter, SP100, SP100-HMG and HP1 behave as transcriptional repressors in transfected mammalian cells. These observations present molecular evidence for an association between the PML/SP100 NBs and the chromatin nuclear compartment. They support a model in which the NBs may play a role in certain aspects of chromatin dynamics.
96	NR	9628743	Fractionation of human cell extracts by cisplatin-DNA affinity chromatography was employed to identify proteins capable of binding cisplatin-damaged DNA. A specific protein-DNA complex, termed DRP-3, was identified in an electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) using a cisplatin-damaged DNA probe. Using this assay we purified DRP-3 and the final fraction contained proteins of 70, 53, 46, 32, and 14 kDa. On the basis of subunit molecular weights, antibody reactivity, and DNA binding activities, DRP-3 was identified as human replication protein A (hRPA). Therefore, we assessed the binding of recombinant human RPA (rhRPA) to duplex cisplatin-damaged DNA in vitro. Global treatment of a highly purified completely duplex 44-bp DNA with cisplatin resulted in a 10-20-fold increase in rhRPA binding compared to the undamaged control. The stability of the RPA-DNA complexes was assessed, and NaCl and MgCl2 concentrations that completely inhibited rhRPA binding to undamaged DNA had only a minimal effect on binding to duplex platinated DNA. We assessed rhRPA binding to a duplex DNA containing a single site-specific 1,2-d(GpG) cisplatin adduct, and the results revealed a 4-6-fold increase in binding to this DNA substrate compared to an undamaged control DNA of identical sequence. These results are consistent with RPA being involved in the initial recognition of cisplatin-damaged DNA, possibly mediating DNA repair events. Therefore, we assessed how another cisplatin DNA binding protein, HMG-1, affected the ability of rhRPA to bind damaged DNA. Competition binding assays show minimal dissociation of either protein from cisplatin-damaged DNA during the course of the reaction. Simultaneous addition experiments revealed that HMG-1 binding to cisplatin-damaged DNA was minimally affected by rhRPA, while HMG-1 inhibited the damaged-DNA binding activity of rhRPA. These data are consistent with HMG-1 blocking DNA repair and possibly having the capability to enhance the cytotoxic efficacy of the drug cisplatin.
96	NR	9633537	The high mobility group (HMG) 1 protein is a highly conserved and ubiquitous chromosomal protein found enriched in active chromatin. In this study, we have investigated the effect of estrogen on the expression of the human high mobility group protein HMG1 gene and found that the HMG1 mRNA level in MCF-7 cells was sharply increased 2.5-fold after 30 min of estrogen treatment. Under continuous estrogen treatment, the HMG1 mRNA level decreased to a 1.5 times that of the basal level at 90 min and remained at this elevated level under estrogen treatment for up to 24 h. These results support the recent finding by Verrier et al. (C.S. Verrier, 1997, Mol. Endocrinol. 11, 1009-1019) that HMG1 promotes the binding of the estrogen receptor to the estrogen response element and further reinforce our believe that HMG1 plays a significant role in estrogen-induced gene expression.
96	NR	9617797	The abundance of an mRNA encoding an HMG 1/2 protein from Pharbitis nil (HMG1) has been previously shown to be regulated by light and an endogenous rhythm in cotyledons. A second Pharbitis nil HMG cDNA (HMG2) was characterized. The sequence of HMG2 was 82% and 86% identical to HMG1 at the nucleotide and amino acid level, respectively. As with HMG1, HMG2 mRNA was detected in all vegetative tissues and was most abundant in roots. However, unlike HMG1, HMG2 mRNA abundance did not increase upon transfer of cotyledons to darkness and did not exhibit regulation by an endogenous circadian rhythm when maintained in continuous darkness over a 68 h period. Similarly, while the abundance of HMG1 mRNA during a dark period that induced photoperiodically controlled flowering was dramatically affected by brief light exposure (night break), this treatment had no effect on HMG2 mRNA abundance. Collectively, these data are consistent with a role of HMG1 in contributing to the circadian-regulated and/or dark-regulated gene expression with constitutive expression of HMG2 playing a housekeeping role in the general regulation of gene expression in Pharbitis nil cotyledons.
96	NR	9553091	HMG1 is an evolutionarily highly conserved chromosomal protein consisting of two folded DNA-binding domains, A and B ("high mobility group (HMG) boxes"), and an acidic C-terminal domain. Several lines of evidence suggest that previously reported sequence-independent DNA bending and looping by HMG1 and its HMG box domains might be important for the proposed role of the protein in transcription and recombination. We have used ligase-mediated circularization assays to investigate the contribution of the individual A and B HMG1 box domains and of the linker region between A/B- and B/C-domains, which flank the "minimal" B-domain (residues 92-162), to the ability of the HMG1 protein (residues 1-215) to bend DNA. Neither the minimal B-domain nor the minimal B-domain with a 7-residue N-terminal extension (85TKKKFKD91) bent the DNA. The attachment of an extra 18-residue C-terminal additional extension (residues 163-180) to the minimal B-domain had only a small effect on the ability of the HMG box to bend DNA. On the other hand, circularization assay with a B-domain having both 7-residue N-terminal and 18-residue C-terminal flanking sequences (residues 85-180) revealed a strong bending of the DNA, suggesting that both extensions are a prerequisite for efficient DNA bending by the B-domain. We have also shown that a single lysine residue (Lys90) in a short N-terminal sequence 90KD91 attached to the B-domain is sufficient for strong distortion of DNA by bending, provided that the B-domain is flanked by the 18-residue C-terminal flanking sequence. Although the DNA bending potential of HMG1 seems to be predominantly due to the B-domain flanked by basic sequences, covalent attachment of the A- and B-domains is necessary for efficient DNA flexure and the ability of the (A+B)-bidomain to bend DNA is further modulated in the native HMG1 protein by its acidic C-domain.
96	NR	9600082	DNA ligase IV in a complex with XRCC4 is responsible for DNA end-joining in repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSB) and V(D)J recombination. We found that non-histone chromosomal high mobility group (HMG) proteins 1 and 2 enhanced the ligation of linearized pUC119 DNA with DNA ligase IV from rat liver nuclear extract. Intra-molecular and inter-molecular ligations of cohesive-ended and blunt-ended DNA were markedly stimulated by HMG1 and 2. Recombinant HMG2-domain A, B, and (A + B) polypeptides were similarly, but non-identically, effective for the stimulation of DSB ligation reaction. Ligation of single-strand breaks (nicks) was only slightly activated by the HMG proteins. The DNA end-binding Ku protein singly or in combination with the catalytic component of DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) as the DNA-PK holoenzyme was ineffective for the ligation of linearized pUC119 DNA. Although the stimulatory effect of HMG1 and 2 on ligation of DSB in vitro was not specific to DNA ligase IV, these results suggest that HMG1 and 2 are involved in the final ligation step in DNA end-joining processes of DSB repair and V(D)J recombination.
96	NR	9598312	High mobility group (HMG) proteins are abundant components of mammalian nuclei and fall into three families. The members of one such family, HMG1 and HMG2, are ubiquitously expressed and facilitate the formation of nucleoprotein complexes where the DNA is sharply bent. We have identified a mouse cDNA that codes for a novel 200-amino-acid protein of the HMG1/2 family, which we called HMG4. The mouse Hmg4 gene is highly expressed in the embryo; Hmg4 transcripts are barely detectable in adult tissues. The human HMG4 gene, which is extremely similar to its mouse homolog, has been sequenced as part of chromosome X, band q28. HMG4, HMG1, and HMG2 proteins have been highly conserved during vertebrate evolution, suggesting that each has at least some unique property. It is possible that HMG4 is required during development.
96	NR	9578844	Cationic liposome-mediated gene therapy of cancer has been examined in a disseminated intraperitoneal tumor model. A combination of the strong CAG promoter-enhancer unit and high mobility group 1,2 (HMG-1,2) proteins has been used to improve transfection efficiency. The optimal deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and HMG-1,2 concentration ratio was determined in in vitro studies. Subsequently, we administered the liposome-DNA-HMG-1,2 complex intraperitoneally to tumor bearing nude mice and defined the most efficient concentration of liposomes. Using this approach, the median survival of tumor bearing nude mice was prolonged by the administration of a human tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) gene inserted into a eukaryotic strong expression vector (pcagTNF-alpha) and exogenously added interferon-gamma (INF-gamma) (72 +/- 3 days: mean +/- s.e.). By contrast, survival was 36 +/- 3, 39 +/- 3 and 46 +/- 4 days in group receiving the TNF-alpha gene inserted in the reverse orientation (pcagTNF-alpha R) and normal saline (NS), pcagTNF-alpha R and INF-gamma and pcagTNF-alpha and NS, respectively. These results demonstrate an efficient approach for gene therapy of disseminated intraperitoneal cancer.
96	NR	9567220	Recent advancement of gene technology allows us a practical approach to gene therapy. Among various in vivo gene transfer techniques available, the HVJ liposome method is an efficient procedure which could target the glomerular cells. Using this method, HVJ-mediated cell fusion activity enables us to introduce genetic materials directly into the cytosol without degradation. In addition, cointroduction of non-histone nuclear protein, high-mobility group (HMG-1), efficiently facilitates migration of foreign DNA to the nucleus. Although there still exist some limitations, the HVJ liposome method may be applicable to the treatment of glomerular diseases as well as to analysis of the molecular aspects of renal pathophysiology.
96	NR	9497395	Recombinant yeast nucleosome assembly protein (yNAP-1) facilitates the formation of uniformly spaced nucleosomes from high molecular weight DNA and core histone octamers. No additional factors or metabolites are required. The repeat length of the chromatin produced is about 146 base pairs. To obtain the most distinct nucleosomal ladders, the core histones must preexist as an octamer complex. yNAP-1 forms complexes with core histones as judged by native gel electrophoresis, chemical cross-linking, limited histone proteolysis, and affinity blotting. A discrete complex was observed with a probable ratio of yNAP-1 to histone octamer of 4:1. Chromatin produced by salt dialysis does not contain uniformly spaced nucleosomes, but subsequent incubation with yNAP-1 creates uniform spacing. Trypsin-treated core octamers that lack amino termini, although capable of forming core particles with core-length DNA by salt dialysis, are not assembled by yNAP-1 into uniformly spaced nucleosomes on high molecular weight DNA. Proteolytic removal of the amino termini of the core histones precludes complex formation between a histone octamer and yNAP-1. Affinity blotting also demonstrates that yNAP-1 binds linker histones and high mobility group (HMG)-1/HMG-2 but not HMG-14. Competition experiments with poly-L-arginine, poly-L-lysine, and protamine reveal that yNAP-1 binds to core and linker histones more tightly despite the much higher positive charge densities of the former molecules. Naturally occurring acetylated histone H4 species show no evidence for differential yNAP-1 binding. yNAP-1 is not bound tightly to the resulting chromatin after deposition and thus could act catalytically.
96	NR	9524219	A cDNA clone encoding a HMG-1 protein from maturing seeds of Canavalia gladiata was isolated and characterized with respect to its sequence, genomic organization and the expression pattern in seeds. The predicted polypeptide had the characteristic conserved motifs of the HMG-1/2 protein including N-terminal basic region, one HMG-box and polyacidic carboxy terminus. Southern blot analysis suggested that the HMG-1 gene is a single copy gene. Northern blot analysis indicated that the HMG-1 gene was expressed both in maturing and germinated seeds.
96	NR	9523013	The T160 protein belongs to the HMG-1 box protein family and preferentially binds to non-B-DNA conformations with no sequence specificity. Its exact role has yet to be defined, though it seems to participate in processes involving DNA, such as replication, transcription and recombination. We have used an antisense RNA strategy to investigate its role in cell growth and proliferation. T160 expression is strongly suppressed by stable introduction of an antisense construct into NIH3T3 cells, and this decrease is accompanied by substantial changes in the growth properties of the stable transfectants. Impaired growth of T160- cells was mainly related to two mechanisms: i) decreased rates of cell proliferation at normal serum concentration; and ii) occurrence of cell death by apoptosis at low serum concentration, as demonstrated by both flow cytometry and microscopy. The finding that decreased T160 availability affects cell proliferation, provides further evidence of its involvement in a basic cell function, such as DNA replication.
96	NR	9485418	The maize HMGa protein is a typical member of the family of plant chromosomal HMG1-like proteins. The HMG domain of HMGa is flanked by a basic N-terminal domain characteristic for plant HMG1-like proteins, and is linked to the acidic C-terminal domain by a short basic region. Various derivatives of the HMGa protein were expressed in Escherichia coli and purified. The individual HMG domain can functionally complement the defect of the HU-like chromatin-associated Hbsu protein in Bacillus subtilis. The basic N-terminal domain which contacts DNA enhances the affinity of the protein for linear DNA, whereas it has little effect on the structure-specific binding to DNA minicircles. The acidic C-terminal domain reduces the affinity of HMGa for linear DNA, but does not affect to the same extent the recognition of DNA structure which is an intrinsic property of the HMG domain. The efficiency of the HMGa constructs to facilitate circularization of short DNA fragments in the presence of DNA ligase is like the binding to linear DNA altered by the basic and acidic domains flanking the HMG domain, while the supercoiling activity of HMGa is only slightly influenced by the same regions. Both the basic N-terminal and the acidic C-terminal domains contribute directly to the self-association of HMGa in the presence of DNA. Collectively, these findings suggest that the intrinsic properties of the HMG domain can be modulated within the HMGa protein by the basic and acidic domains.
96	NR	9472015	The binding of p53 protein to DNA is stimulated by its interaction with covalent as well as noncovalent modifiers. We report the identification of a factor from HeLa nuclear extracts that activates p53 DNA binding. This factor was purified to homogeneity and identified as the high mobility group protein, HMG-1. HMG-1 belongs to a family of highly conserved chromatin-associated nucleoproteins that bend DNA and facilitate the binding of various transcription factors to their cognate DNA sequences. We demonstrate that recombinant His-tagged HMG-1 enhances p53 DNA binding in vitro and also that HMG-1 and p53 can interact directly in vitro. Unexpectedly, HMG-1 also stimulates DNA binding by p53Delta30, a carboxy-terminally deleted form of the protein that is considered to be constitutively active, suggesting that HMG-1 stimulates p53 by a mechanism that is distinct from other known activators of p53. Finally, using transient transfection assays we show that HMG-1 can increase p53 and p53Delta30-mediated transactivation in vivo. HMG-1 promotes the assembly of higher order p53 nucleoprotein structures, and these data, along with the fact that HMG-1 is capable of bending DNA, suggest that HMG-1 may activate p53 DNA binding by a novel mechanism involving a structural change in the target DNA.
96	NR	9492314	High-mobility group (HMG) 1 is a relatively highly abundant chromosomal protein with structural- rather than sequence-specific preference for binding to DNA. HMG1 has two highly related, folded domains A and B (HMG boxes), attached by a short basic region to an acidic C-terminal domain. We have studied binding of the B-domain of HMG1 protein and its mutants to supercoiled DNA by a gel-retardation assay and electron microscopy. Using a gel-retardation assay, we have demonstrated that HMG1 or HMG1 lacking the acidic C-terminal domain [i.e. HMG1(A+B) bi-domain], but not the isolated B-domain, could preferentially bind supercoiled over-relaxed closed circular or linear DNA. Mutational analysis of the HMG1 B-domain revealed that replacement of Lys96 of the extended N-terminal segment (and much less the neighboring Arg97) and Lys128 of helix II to glutamic acid severely impaired binding of the HMG box domain to supercoiled DNA. The latter mutation within helix II significantly decreased the alpha-helical content of the B-domain as revealed by circular dichroism. We have also shown that mutation of several residues within helix I of the B-domain, in particular Arg110, resulted in a diminished binding to supercoiled DNA as revealed by intensive smearing and reduced retardation of the protein/DNA complexes. These findings indicated that the extended N-terminus, helix I and helix II of the HMG1 B-domain are likely in contact with DNA. Electron microscopy revealed that the B-domain could bind to supercoiled DNA at higher HMG/DNA molar ratios as oligomeric protein beads with subsequent association of the beads into large nucleoprotein complexes from which many looped DNA molecules emerged. Most of the introduced mutations within all three helices of the B-domain (involving mainly basic and aromatic residues) abolished formation of the large nucleoprotein complexes even though the binding of the HMG box to supercoiled DNA was retained as revealed by a gel-retardation assay. A model for the interaction of the B-domain of HMG 1 with supercoiled DNA is presented and discussed.
96	NR	9486411	In a previous study, we reported that the high mobility group (HMG) non-histone chromosomal proteins HMG1 and HMG2 were novel target antigens of P-ANCA. In this study, we determined the immunodiagnostic value of anti-HMG1/HMG2 antibodies in patients with UC. Sixty sera from patients with UC were tested for reactivity with HMG1 and HMG2 by means of ELISA. Anti-HMG1 antibody was detected in 32% of patients (40% of P-ANCA+ patients). Anti-HMG2 antibody was detected in 33% (40% of P-ANCA+ patients). Thirty-five percent of sera were positive for antibody to either HMG1 or HMG2 (43% of P-ANCA+ patients). P-ANCA+ patients expressed anti-HMG1/HMG2 antibodies with significantly greater frequency compared with P-ANCA- patients. Furthermore, the anti-HMG1/HMG2 antibodies were significantly related to disease activity in UC. Sixteen of the 18 UC patients, who had high titres of anti-HMG1 or -HMG2 antibody during the active phase, showed lower titres in the inactive phase. Anti-HMG1/HMG2 antibodies appear to be useful as a marker for disease activity in UC.
96	NR	9473681	Up-stream stimulatory factor (USF)1 is a human transcription factor which binds specifically to the E-box in the Ad MLP located at - 58 from the start site. The nature of USF binding on a Ad MLP DNA fragment was investigated in the presence of DTT and also in the presence of purified HMG-1 using electrophoretic mobility shift assay. We show that the binding capacity of USF for the E-box increases significantly with increasing DTT concentrations. At the higher DTT levels, a second USF-DNA complex is formed in which there is co-occupation of both the E-box and the initiator sequence. The stability of the second complex is largely refractory to an excess of unlabeled oligonucleotide which contains the initiator sequence. These findings indicate a cooperative binding interaction between USF ligands bound simultaneously at the E-box and the Inr sequence. Two models are proposed which are consistent with these data. Furthermore, experiments indicate that the presence of HMG-1, a nuclear protein known to influence transcriptional activity, increases USF binding activity at the E-box by as much as 100%. These findings indicate that both reducing conditions and HMG-1 may act as modulators of USF-regulated transcription.
96	NR	9461286	The vertebrate high-mobility-group (HMG) protein HMG1 is an abundant non-histone protein which is considered as an architectural element in chromatin. In the monocotyledonous plant maize, four different HMG1-like proteins (HMGa, HMGc1/2, HMGd) have been identified, whereas other eukaryotes usually express only two different proteins of this type. We have examined here the HMG1-like proteins of the dicotyledonous plant Arabidopsis thaliana. The isolation and analysis of cDNAs encoding five different so far uncharacterised HMG1-like proteins (now termed HMG alpha, HMG beta1/2, HMG gamma, HMG delta) from Arabidopsis indicates that the expression of multiple HMG1-like proteins is a general feature of (higher) plants. The Arabidopsis HMG1-like proteins contain an HMG domain as a common feature, but outside this conserved DNA-binding motif the amino acid sequences are significantly different indicating that this protein family displays a greater structural variability in plants than in other eukaryotes. The five HMG1-like proteins were expressed in Escherichia coli and purified. They bind with somewhat different affinity to linear double-stranded DNA. The recognition of DNA structure is evident from their preferential interaction with DNA minicircles relative to linear DNA. Reverse-transcribed PCR suggested that the five HMG1-like genes are simultaneously expressed in Arabidopsis leaves and suspension culture cells.
96	NR	9428691	Dof proteins are a family of plant transcription factors that have a strongly conserved DNA-binding domain, designated the Dof domain. This domain has the potential to form a single zinc finger. This report describes the self-association of a maize Dof protein, Dof1 (previously designated MNB1a). Affinity chromatography revealed that Dof1 also interacted with another maize Dof protein, Dof2, as well as with high-mobility-group (HMG) protein 1. Results of mapping of the region required for the protein-protein interactions of Dof1 suggested that these interactions may be mediated by the Dof domain. When gel mobility shift assays were performed with purified recombinant Dof proteins, homomeric and heteromeric complexes of Dof proteins on DNA were detected. It seems possible that formation of complexes of different Dof proteins through direct protein-protein interactions might be involved in the regulation of transcription. Evidence is also presented that HMG1 has an effect on the binding of Dof1 to DNA. Therefore, it appears that the Dof domain is a multifunctional domain that is involved not merely in binding to DNA but also in multiple protein-protein interactions.
96	NR	9427537	We have determined the effect of HMG-1 bound to cisplatin-damaged DNA on the activities of calf helicase E. DNase I protection analysis demonstrated HMG-1 bound a cisplatin-damaged 24 base oligonucleotide annealed to M13mp18. Exonuclease digestion experiments revealed that greater than 90% of the DNA substrates contained a single site specific cisplatin adduct and, maximally, 65% of the substrates were bound by HMG-1. Helicase E catalyzed displacement of the cisplatin-damaged DNA oligonucleotide was inhibited by HMG-1 in a concentration-dependent manner. Time course experiments revealed a decreased rate of displacement in reactions containing HMG-1. The maximum inhibition observed was 55% and taking into account that only 65% of the substrates had HMG-1 bound, approximately 85% inhibition was observed on platinated DNA substrates containing HMG-1. Inhibition of helicase activity was proportional to the amount of substrate bound by HMG-1 based on the displacement and exonuclease assays at varying HMG-1 concentrations. The ability of helicase E to displace an undamaged DNA oligonucleotide from a cisplatin-damaged DNA template was also inhibited by HMG-1. Interestingly, HMG-1 had no effect on the rate of DNA-dependent ATP hydrolysis catalyzed by helicase E on the same DNA substrate. The inhibition of helicase activity by HMG-1 binding cisplatin-damaged DNA further supports a role for HMG-1 inhibiting DNA repair which may contribute to cellular sensitivity to cisplatin.
96	NR	9398441	We show that klp38B, isolated as a mutation that dominantly prolongs blastoderm mitotic cycles in Drosophila, encodes a Drosophila kinesin-like protein. Further genetic analyses show that Klp38B not only functions during mitosis, but is also required for meiosis and abdominal segmentation. Sequence comparisons suggest that Klp38B encodes an amino-terminal microtubule motor domain, a central alpha-helical coiled-coil domain, and a C-terminal globular domain. Evidence that Klp38B is required during meiosis is that flies transheterozygous for mutations in both klp38B and nod have a high frequency of 4th chromosome meiotic nondisjunction. Nod is a chromokinesin, a chromosome binding kinesin, that is believed to provide astral-exclusion forces during the metaphase stage of meiosis. Evidence that Klp38B is required during mitosis is that embryos from female germline clones of klp38B mutations have holes in the cuticle similar to a zygotic string (dCDC25) phenotype. Also, anti-Klp38B antibody injection into precellularization blastoderm embryos causes developmental arrest and the formation of circular mitotic figures. We speculate, based on these phenotypes, that Klp38B is a chromokinesin that provides astral-exclusion forces on the chromosomes during meiosis and mitosis. Consistent with this hypothesis, we have identified an HMG-1 homologous region on Klp38B that could potentially bind AT-rich DNA sequences. Finally, we show that klp38B mutations have defects in abdominal segmentation, suggesting that Klp38B, like Xenopus chromokinesin Xklp1, might be involved in polar granule formation.
96	NR	9379182	The DNA binding properties of two new platinum compounds, cis-[Pt(L)2Cl2]. 2H2O where L is 5(6)-non/chlorosubstituted-2-hydroxymethylbenzimidazole, were examined and compared with cisplatin. The platinum compounds (compounds I and II) were used to modify DNA, which was then used in electrophoretic mobility shift assays with the high mobility group (HMG)-do-main protein, HMG1. The DNA platinated with these compounds was specifically recognized by HMG1. It was concluded that the adducts formed by compounds I and II distort the DNA in a manner similar to cisplatin diadducts.
96	NR	9348088	High mobility group (HMG) proteins 1 and 2 contain two similar but non-identical repeats of DNA-binding domains and an acidic C-terminal. The proposed functions of HMG proteins 1 and 2 imply a probable difference in their DNA-binding abilities. The primary studies by gel retardation assay showed that HMG2 has higher affinity than HMG1 for supercoiled and linear DNA. The DNA-binding of HMG2 appeared strong enough to allow exchange with HMG1 molecule already bound to DNA, while the DNA-binding region of HMG1 showed higher affinity than that of HMG2. In order to compare more quantitatively the affinities, surface plasmon resonance (SPR) measurements using a BIAcore instrument were conducted. The kinetic data indicated that the Kd for the complex of HMG2 with DNA is smaller than that of HMG1, in contrast to the situation for the DNA-binding region of these proteins. The sequence between the second DNA-binding domain and the acidic C-terminal of HMG proteins is required for tight DNA-binding. Also, the acidic C-terminal strongly modulates the DNA-binding ability of each protein. The usefulness of SPR measurement for quantitative analysis of affinity and regions involved in DNA-binding under conditions nearly identical to those in solution is discussed.
96	NR	9336414	OBJECTIVE: To extend our work on the mapping of B cell epitopes on nucleosomal high mobility group (HMG) proteins in the sera of patients with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (JRA). METHODS: Seventy-seven pauciarticular-onset JRA serum samples from antinuclear antibody (ANA)-positive patients and 42 polyarticular-onset JRA patient sera found to react with HMG-2 by immunoblotting were used in this study. To identify B cell epitopes on HMG-2, recombinant HMG-2 protein fragments were used in enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and in competition ELISA experiments with a set of overlapping synthetic peptides. Fine epitope mapping was achieved by oligopeptide synthesis, followed by immunoblotting. RESULTS: Pauciarticular, but not polyarticular, JRA patient sera were found to recognize a lysine-rich major epitope (KKGKKKDP), which is located in the linker region of the HMG box domains of the HMG-2 nonhistone chromosomal protein. No significant immunoreactions were observed in sera from ANA-negative JRA patients and in sera from children with nonrheumatic diseases, indicating that this epitope seems to be specific for pauciarticular-onset JRA. CONCLUSION: In addition to our previous finding that JRA sera will react with a defined epitope on HMG-17, pauciarticular JRA patient sera were also found to recognize a defined epitope on the HMG-2 protein, thus suggesting the importance of this epitope in the etiology of JRA.
96	NR	9330912	Sequence-dependency of high-mobility group protein (HMG) 1-induced DNA bending is examined for microsatellites using a circularization assay which can measure the extent of bending. Fragments of 133 bp containing (GGA/TCC)11 in the middle showed greater bending than those harboring (GAA/TTC)11 and (GT/AC)17 repeats, and fragments possessing (GA/TC)17 exhibited only slight bending. Differences were not detected for fragments having the repeats near the end. Filter binding assays showed no difference in their binding affinity, suggesting that GGA/TCC repeats are more flexible than the other three repeats as concerns HMG1-induced bending. These results suggest that the mammalian genomes comprise flexible and inflexible regions of microsatellites which might play roles in chromatin architectures and in dynamic packaging of genomic DNA during the cell division cycle.
96	NR	9298962	NA
96	NR	9254714	High mobility group proteins HMG-I(Y) and HMG-1, as well as histone H1, all share the common property of binding to four-way junction DNA (4H), a synthetic substrate commonly used to study proteins involved in recognizing and resolving Holliday-type junctions formed during in vivo genetic recombination events. The structure of 4H has also been hypothesized to mimic the DNA crossovers occurring at, or near, the entrance and exit sites on the nucleosome. Furthermore, upon binding to either duplex DNA or chromatin, all three of these nuclear proteins share the ability to significantly alter the structure of bound substrates. In order to further elucidate their substrate binding abilities, electrophoretic mobility shift assays were employed to investigate the relative binding capabilities of HMG-I(Y), HMG-1 and H1 to 4H in vitro. Data indicate a definite hierarchy of binding preference by these proteins for 4H, with HMG-I(Y) having the highest affinity (Kd approximately 6.5 nM) when compared with either H1 (Kd approximately 16 nM) or HMG-1 (Kd approximately 80 nM). Competition/titration assays demonstrated that all three proteins bind most tightly to the same site on 4H. Hydroxyl radical footprinting identified the strongest site for binding of HMG-I(Y), and presumably for the other proteins as well, to be at the center of 4H. Together these in vitro results demonstrate that HMG-I(Y) and H1 are co-dominant over HMG-1 for binding to the central crossover region of 4H and suggest that in vivo both of these proteins may exert a dominant effect over HMG-1 in recognizing and binding to altered DNA structures, such as Holliday junctions, that have conformations similar to 4H.
96	NR	9242635	High mobility group (HMG) proteins are thought to facilitate assembly of higher order chromatin structure through modulation of DNA conformation. In this work we investigate the bending of a 30-base pair DNA fragment induced by Chironomus HMG1 (cHMG1a), and HMGI (cHMGI) proteins. The DNA bending was measured in solution by monitoring the end-to-end distance between fluorescence probes attached to opposite ends of the DNA fragment. The distance was measured by fluorescence energy transfer using a novel europium chelate as a fluorescence donor. These measurements revealed that the end-to-end distance in the 30-base pair DNA was decreased from approximately 100 A in free DNA to approximately 50.5 A in cHMG1a. DNA complex. The most probable DNA bending angle consistent with these distance measurements is about 150 degrees. The deletion of the charged regulatory domains located close to the C terminus of the HMG1 box domain of cHMG1a protein had no effect on the induced bend angle. The ability to induce a large DNA bend distinguishes the cHMG1 from the cHMGI protein. Only small perturbation of the DNA conformation was observed upon binding of the cHMGI protein. A strong DNA bending activity of cHMG1a and its relative abundance in the cell suggests that this protein plays a very important role in modulation of chromatin structure.
96	NR	9234680	The retinoblastoma susceptibility gene product pRb restricts cellular proliferation by affecting gene expression by all three classes of nuclear RNA polymerases. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying pRb-mediated repression of ribosomal DNA (rDNA) transcription by RNA polymerase I, we have analyzed the effect of pRb in a reconstituted transcription system. We demonstrate that pRb, but not the related protein p107, acts as a transcriptional repressor by interfering with the assembly of transcription initiation complexes. The HMG box-containing transcription factor UBF is the main target for pRb-induced transcriptional repression. UBF and pRb form in vitro complexes involving the C-terminal part of pRb and HMG boxes 1 and 2 of UBF. We show that the interactions between UBF and TIF-IB and between UBF and RNA polymerase I, respectively, are not perturbed by pRb. However, the DNA binding activity of UBF to both synthetic cruciform DNA and the rDNA promoter is severely impaired in the presence of pRb. These studies reveal another mechanism by which pRb suppresses cell proliferation, namely, by direct inhibition of cellular rRNA synthesis.
96	NR	9245584	When situated in a fork-like synthetic DNA replication substrate, the 1,2-intrastrand crosslink at the d(GpG) site, the most frequent adduct formed in the reaction between DNA and the anticancer drug cisplatin (cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II)), is efficiently bypassed by eukaryotic cell extracts. We show here that the rat high-mobility-group protein 1 (HMG1) binds preferentially to the platinated fork-like synthetic DNA and inhibits the translesion synthesis. The same protein, but without the acidic tail, inhibits also the translesion synthesis. These results suggest that HMG proteins might contribute to the sensitivity of cells to cisplatin by directly affecting DNA replication.
96	NR	9212049	The estrogen receptor (ER) belongs to a family of ligand-inducible nuclear receptors that exert their effects by binding to cis-acting DNA elements in the regulatory region of target genes. The detailed mechanisms by which ER interacts with the estrogen response element (ERE) and affects transcription still remain to be elucidated. To study the ER-ERE interaction and transcription initiation, we employed purified recombinant ER expressed in both the baculovirus-Sf9 and his-tagged bacterial systems. The effect of high-mobility group (HMG) protein HMG-1 and purified recombinant TATA-binding protein-associated factor TAF(II)30 on ER-ERE binding and transcription initiation were assessed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay and in vitro transcription from an ERE-containing template (pERE2LovTATA), respectively. We find that purified, recombinant ER fails to bind to ERE in spite of high ligand-binding activity and electrophoretic and immunological properties identical to ER in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. HMG-1 interacts with ER and promotes ER-ERE binding in a concentration- and time-dependent manner. The effectiveness of HMG-1 to stimulate ER-ERE binding in the electrophoretic mobility shift assay depends on the sequence flanking the ERE consensus as well as the position of the latter in the oligonucleotide. We find that TAF(II)30 has no effect on ER-ERE binding either alone or in combination with ER and HMG-1. Although HMG-1 promotes ER-ERE binding, it fails to stimulate transcription initiation either in the presence or absence of hormone. In contrast, TAF(II)30, while not affecting ER-ERE binding, stimulates transcription initiation 20-fold in the presence of HMG-1. These results indicate that HMG-1 and TAF(II)30 act in sequence, the former acting to promote ER-ERE binding followed by the latter to stimulate transcription initiation.
96	NR	9166431	Antigen receptor gene rearrangement is directed by DNA motifs consisting of a conserved heptamer and nonamer separated by a nonconserved spacer of either 12 or 23 base pairs (12 or 23 recombination signal sequences [RSS]). V(D)J recombination requires that the rearranging DNA segments be flanked by RSSs of different spacer lengths, a phenomenon known as the 12/23 rule. Recent studies have shown that this restriction operates at the level of DNA cleavage, which is mediated by the products of the recombination activating genes RAG1 and RAG2. Here, we show that RAG1 and RAG2 are not sufficient for 12/23 dependent cleavage, whereas RAG1 and RAG2 complemented with whole cell extract faithfully recapitulates the 12/23 rule. In addition, HMG box containing proteins HMG1 and HMG2 enhance RAG1- and RAG2-mediated cleavage of substrates containing 23 RSS but not of substrates containing only 12 RSS. These results suggest the existence of a nucleoprotein complex at the cleavage site, consisting of architectural, catalytic, and regulatory components.
96	NR	9184213	V(D)J recombination requires a pair of signal sequences with spacer lengths of 12 and 23 bp between the conserved heptamer and nonamer elements. The RAG1 and RAG2 proteins initiate the reaction by making double-strand DNA breaks at both signals, and must thus be able to operate on these two different spatial arrangements. We show that the DNA-bending proteins HMG1 and HMG2 stimulate cleavage and RAG protein binding at the 23 bp spacer signal. These findings suggest that DNA bending is important for bridging the longer spacer, and explain how a similar array of RAG proteins could accommodate a signal with either a 12 or a 23 bp spacer. An additional effect of HMG proteins is to stimulate coupled cleavage greatly when both signal sequences are present, suggesting that these proteins also aid the formation of a synaptic complex.
96	NR	9197548	We have purified the chromosomal high mobility group (HMG) protein HMGd from maize suspension culture cells, determined the N-terminal amino acid (aa) sequence, and isolated the corresponding cDNA. Sequence analysis showed that the cDNA encoded a protein of 126 aa residues with a theoretical mass of 14,104 Da. The protein contains an HMG-box DNA-binding domain and a short acidic C-terminal tail. HMGd is in approx. 65% of its residues identical to maize HMGa, whereas it is only approx. 46% identical to maize HMGcl/2. The differences to the previously reported HMG proteins in aa sequence, in overall charge and in protein size indicate that we have identified a third type of plant chromosomal HMG-box protein belonging to the HMG1 protein family. Immunoblot analysis with a HMGd antiserum reveals that HMGd is expressed in all tissues tested.
96	NR	9154923	Tandem repeats of simple doublet and triplet sequences occur with high frequency in the DNA of eucaryotes. Among the most frequent is the repeat of dTG, which has unusual structural properties. We show here that HMG1 (modeled by the second HMG box motif from HMG1 of the rat, HMGb) binds to complexes formed from annealing unequal lengths of dTG x dCA and inhibits the in vitro elongation of these complexes by the Klenow fragment of DNA polymerase I at 37 degrees C. At 46 degrees C, HMGb enhances the elongation. Polylysine inhibits elongation at both temperatures. These results show that the stability of this repeat in vivo can be influenced by the presence of basic proteins in general, and more selectively by the abundant nuclear protein HMG1.
96	NR	9094713	During V(D)J recombination, RAG1 and RAG2 cleave DNA adjacent to highly conserved recombination signals, but nothing is known about the protein-DNA complexes that exist after cleavage. Using a properly regulated in vitro V(D)J cleavage system, together with nuclease sensitivity, mobility shift, and immunoprecipitation experiments, we provide evidence that a stable complex is formed postcleavage between synapsed recombination signals. This complex includes the proteins RAG1, RAG2, HMG-1 or the closely related HMG-2 protein, and the components of the DNA-dependent protein kinase. The existence of such a stable complex explains a number of in vivo observations and suggests that remodeling of postcleavage synaptic complexes is an important step in the resolution of signal ends in V(D)J recombination.
96	NR	9161031	A 268 bp region (P268) of the pea plastocyanin gene promoter responsible for high-level expression has been shown to interact with the high mobility group proteins HMG-1 and HMG-I/Y isolated from pea shoot chromatin. cDNAs encoding an HMG-1 protein of 154 amino acid residues containing a single HMG-box and a C-terminal acidic tail and an HMG-I/Y-like protein of 197 amino acid residues containing four AT-hooks have been isolated and expressed in Escherichia coli to provide large amounts of full-length proteins. DNase I footprinting identified eight binding sites for HMG-I/Y and six binding sites for HMG-1 in P268. Inhibition of binding by the antibiotic distamycin, which binds in the minor groove of A/T-rich DNA, revealed that HMG-I/Y binding was 400-fold more sensitive than HMG-1 binding. Binding-site selection from a pool of random oligonucleotides indicated that HMG-I/Y binds to oligonucleotides containing stretches of five or more A/T bp and HMG-1 binds preferentially to oligonucleotides enriched in dinucleotides such as TpT and TpG.
96	NR	9098077	The mechanism by which the prokaryotic histone-like protein HU replaces the integration host factor (IHF) in the coactivation of the sigma54-dependent promoter Pu of Pseudomonas putida has been investigated. By using a preactivated form of the cognate activator protein XylR, we show that the functional replacement of IHF with HU previously suggested in vivo can be faithfully reproduced in vitro with purified components. Furthermore, the coactivation effect of IHF on Pu could be mimicked not only by HU but also by the mammalian nonhistone chromatin protein HMG-1 and could be bypassed by intrinsically curved DNA. These results suggest that either of two different mechanisms (generation of a site-specific static DNA bend or a general flexibilization of the promoter region) gives rise to the same structural effect of stimulating transcription from Pu through changes in promoter architecture.
96	NR	9049420	The high mobility group (HMG-1) box proteins bind both non-B-DNA conformations and specific nucleotide sequences. They have been implicated in a wide variety of cellular functions involving DNA, such as transcription, replication and recombination. To determine whether HMG-1 box protein T160 plays a role in virus replication, we employed an antisense strategy to inhibit its expression in NIH 3T3 cells. The two T160 clones that expressed levels of T160 50% lower than those expressed by clones transfected with the empty vector (Neo+ clones) were investigated with respect to their permissiveness to the growth of viruses representing three families: Rhabdoviridae, vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV); Picornaviridae, encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV), and Alpha- and Betaherpesviridae, herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) and mouse cytomegalovirus (MCMV), respectively. They displayed a high degree of resistance to MCMV replication, but were fully permissive to the other viruses. Competitive PCR and probing IE-1 products by Western blot analysis showed that this resistance was not due to depressed levels of virus adsorption during the early phases of infection. We therefore conclude that T160 is involved in replication of the betaherpesvirus MCMV.
96	NR	9036861	An 1194-nucleotide complementary DNA clone, FM1, encoding a human high-mobility group-1 protein (HMG-1) was isolated from a well-differentiated human gastric-carcinoma cell line complementary DNA library by a differential screening method. FM1 is similar to the published human HMG-1 in mature protein, with only 3 different codons at positions 11, 149, and 190. We analyzed 33 gastric and colorectal adenocarcinomas for expression of the FM1 gene. Northern-blot analysis revealed that all of the cancers expressed FM1 at a higher level than in corresponding non-cancerous mucosa, with 2 transcripts of approximately 1.4 and 2.4 kilobases. The FM1 expression level in the non-cancerous tissues increased with the depth of accompanying cancer invasion. Only 18.2% of well-differentiated cancers showed a higher expression level in corresponding non-cancerous tissues, whereas the expression in corresponding non-cancerous tissues was significantly higher in moderately (60%) and poorly differentiated (83.3%) cancers. In situ hybridization demonstrated the location of FM1 mRNA in well- and poorly differentiated gastric-cancer cells as well as in non-cancerous tissue adjacent to poorly differentiated gastric cancer, but no hybridization was detected in normal epithelial cells adjacent to well-differentiated gastric cancer. These findings may provide new information on HMG-1 mRNA expression in human gastrointestinal cancer and suggest a correlation between FM1 mRNA expression to the differentiation and the stage of human gastrointestinal adenocarcinomas.
96	NR	9054971	HMG-D is one of the Drosophila counterparts of the vertebrate HMG1/2 class of abundant chromosomal proteins and contains three domains: an HMG domain followed by a basic region and a short acidic carboxyterminal tail. We show that the HMG domain of HMG-D does not bind to deformed DNA structures such as DNA bulges, cis-platinated DNA or four-way junctions but does bind tightly to DNA microcircles, suggesting that in vivo the natural ligands of this domain are tightly bent DNA loops. The flanking basic region substantially increases the DNA-binding activity of the HMG domain to DNA ligands other than microcircles. We demonstrate that the acidic tail alters the structural selectivity of DNA binding by increasing the affinity for deformed DNA and decreasing the affinity for linear B-DNA. Finally, we show that the acidic tail increases the efficiency of constraining preformed negative supercoils but conversely decreases the efficiency of supercoiling relaxed DNA in the presence of topoisomerase I.
96	NR	9054631	Chromium (Cr) is a human carcinogen and a potent DNA damaging agent. Incubation of DNA with CrCl3 resulted in dose-dependent binding of Cr to DNA and, at concentrations >20 microM, altered the electrophoretic mobility of a 100 bp oligonucleotide. We also demonstrate that high mobility group (HMG) proteins 1 and 2 bind Cr-damaged DNA (Cr-DNA). Protein binding was lesion density-dependent, with maximal binding to DNA treated with 100 microM CrCl3. HMG2 binds to Cr-DNA with a calculated Kd of approximately 10(-9) M. These proteins also bound DNA obtained from chromate-treated cells. These results suggest that the covalent attachment of Cr to DNA induces alterations in DNA structure which are recognized by HMG1 and HMG2. Therefore, these proteins may function as Cr-damaged DNA recognition proteins in vivo and as a consequence of binding, may play a role in directing the cellular response to Cr-DNA adduct formation.
96	NR	9031641	The gene that encodes the dorsal switch protein (DSP1) has been isolated from a Drosophila melanogaster cosmid library. It is organized into seven exons and six introns. The relative position of the introns within the region coding for the high mobility group (HMG) domains are identical to those of vertebrate HMG 1/2 genes. The close similarity between DSP1 and HMG 1/2 genes strongly suggests that these genes derived from a common ancestral gene. DSP1 encodes, at least, two distinct mRNAs that differ in the length of their 5'-untranslated region and coding sequence. Detailed sequence analysis shows that alternative splicing of precursor mRNA gives rise to the two isoform mRNAs found in Drosophila cells.
96	NR	9009213	We show here that murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells, following induction with hexamethylene bisacetamide, accumulate high mobility group (HMG)1 protein onto the external surface of the cell in a membrane-associated form detectable by immunostaining with a specific anti-HMG1 protein antibody. This association is maximal at a time corresponding to cell commitment. At longer times, immunostainable cells are progressively reduced and become almost completely undetectable along with the appearance of hemoglobin molecules. Binding to MEL cells does not affect the native molecular structure of HMG1 protein. The type of functional correlation between HMG1 protein and MEL cell differentiation is suggested by the observation that if an anti-HMG1 protein antibody is added at the same time of the inducer almost complete inhibition of cell differentiation is observed, whereas if the antibody is added within the time period in which cells undergo through irreversible commitment, inhibition progressively disappears. A correlation between MEL cell commitment and the biological effect of HMG1 protein can thus be consistently suggested.
96	NR	9016958	Evolution has shaped the organisation of vertebrate genomes, including the human genome. To shed further light on genome history, we have cloned and analysed an HMG gene from lamprey, representing one of the earliest vertebrate lineages. Genes of the HMG1/2 family encode chromosomal proteins that bind DNA in a non-sequence-specific manner, and have been implicated in a variety of cellular processes dependent on chromatin structure. They are characterised by two copies of a conserved motif, the HMG box, followed by an acidic C-terminal region. We report here the cloning of a cDNA clone from the river lamprey Lampetra fluviatilis containing a gene with two HMG boxes and an acidic tail; we designate this gene LfHMG1. Molecular phylogenetic analysis shows that LfHMG1 is descended from a gene ancestral to mammalian HMG1 and HMG2. This implies that there was a duplication event in the HMG1/2 gene family, that occurred after the divergence of the jawed and jawless fishes, 450 million years ago. This conclusion supports and refines the hypothesis that there was a period of extensive gene duplication early in vertebrate evolution. We also show that the HMG1/2 family originated before the protostomes and deuterostomes diverged, over 525 million years ago.
96	NR	9010268	Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) in sera from ulcerative colitis (UC) patients have been described as reacting with proteins in the granules of human neutrophils such as cathepsin G and lactoferrin and with yet unidentified antigens. Here we report the existence of a new member of perinuclear ANCA (P-ANCA) in UC patients. In the previous study, we found that UC patients had a novel P-ANCA against neutrophil 28-kD protein. In this study, we purified the same antigens from HL-60 lysates by using reversed phase high-performance liquid chromatography, and revealed that the 28-kD antigen consisted of two different proteins. The N-terminus amino acids of these proteins are identical with those of high mobility group (HMG) non-histone chromosomal proteins HMG1 and HMG2. Immunoblotting analysis of human neutrophil lysates using rabbit anti-HMG1/2 antisera revealed a single band of 28 kD, and the 28-kD band detected by immunoblotting analysis using patient's serum IgG completely disappeared after preincubation with a mixture of HMG1 and HMG2. Furthermore, rabbit anti-HMG1/2 antisera showed a perinuclear staining pattern in indirect immunofluorescence studies using ethanol-fixed neutrophils. These data demonstrate that HMG1 and HMG2 are novel target antigens of P-ANCA. HMGI and HMG2 are distributed in the nuclei and cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells and act as transcription factors. Their intracellular localization and functions are distinct from those of the previously reported granular antigens of P-ANCA.
96	NR	8955131	The chromosomal high mobility group (HMG) proteins are small and abundant non-histone proteins common to eukaryotes. We have purified the maize HMGc protein from immature kernels and characterized it by mass spectrometry and amino acid sequence analysis. HMGc could be resolved into two similar proteins by reversed phase chromatography. Cloning and characterization of the corresponding cDNAs revealed that they encode two closely related maize HMGc proteins, now termed HMGc1 and HMGc2. Their theoretical masses of 15,316 and 15,007 Da are >300 Da lower than the masses determined for the proteins purified from maize, indicating post-translational modifications of the proteins. Despite sequence similarity to maize HMGa (and previously described homologous proteins of other species) amino acid sequence alignments reveal that HMGc is in several conserved regions distinct from these proteins. Consequently, we have identified a novel type of plant protein containing an HMG box DNA binding domain and belonging to the HMG1 protein family. HMGc1 and HMGc2 were expressed in Escherichia coli, purified to homogeneity, and analyzed for their DNA binding properties. They proved to bind to DNA structure-specifically since they formed complexes with DNA minicircles at concentrations approximately 100-fold lower than the concentrations required to form complexes with linear fragments of identical sequence. Furthermore, HMGc1 and HMGc2 can constrain negative superhelical turns in plasmid DNA.
96	NR	9003783	Transcriptional repression of eukaryotic genes is essential for many cellular and developmental processes, yet the precise mechanisms of repression remain poorly understood. The Dorsal Switch Protein (DSP1) was identified in a genetic screen for activities which convert Dorsal into a transcriptional repressor. DSP1 shares structural homology with the HMG-1/2 family and inhibits activation by the rel transcription factors Dorsal and NF-kappaB in transfection studies. Here we investigate the mechanism of transcriptional repression by DSP1. We found that DSP1 protein can act as a potent transcriptional repressor for multiple activator families in vitro and in transfection studies. DSP1 bound directly to the TATA binding protein (TBP), and formed a stable ternary complex with TBP bound to DNA. DSP1 preferentially disrupted the DNA binding of TBP complexes containing TFIIA and displaced TFIIA from binding to TBP. Consistent with the inhibition of TFIIA-bound complexes, DSP1 was shown to inhibit activated but not basal transcription reactions in vitro. The ability of DSP1 to interact with TBP and to repress transcription was mapped to the carboxy-terminal domain which contains two HMG boxes. Our results support the model that DSP1 represses activated transcription by interfering with the binding of TFIIA, a general transcription factor implicated in activated transcription pathways.
96	NR	8975778	The HMG box domain is a DNA binding domain present in the nonhistone chromosomal proteins HMG1 and HMG2 and in other proteins involved in the regulation of gene expression. Previous studies have demonstrated that HMG1 and HMG2 bind with high affinity to DNA modified with the cancer chemotherapeutic drug cisplatin (CDDP). In this report, we compare the binding of full-length HMG1 and HMG2 and the HMG boxes present in these proteins to that of CDDP-DNA. Complexes between HMG1, HMG2, or HMG Box A + B and CDDP-DNA were stable at > or = 500 mM salt, while complexes between a single HMG box and CDDP-DNA exhibited decreased stability. Analysis of a series of HMG1 Box A mutant constructs revealed different affinities for CDDP-DNA. Two constructs containing a Phe to Ala substitution at position 19 and a Tyr to Gly substitution at position 71, are noteworthy; these peptides exhibited reduced affinity for CDDP-DNA. We have generated a structure of HMG1 Box A and used it, along with the results of our binding studies, to model its interaction with CDDP-DNA. HMG1 Box A binds in the minor groove of CDDP-DNA, in agreement with earlier studies. Our model predicts that Tyr71 partially intercalates and forms an H bond with the sugar-phosphate backbone. The model also suggests that Phe 19 does not directly interact with DNA, and hence an Ala substitution at position 19 may alter protein structure. This model should provide a framework for future studies examining HMG Box-DNA interactions.
96	NR	8972860	The high mobility group protein (HMG)-box is a DNA-binding domain found in many proteins that bind preferentially to DNA of irregular structures in a sequence-independent manner and can bend the DNA. We show here that GST-fusion proteins of HMG domains from HMG1 and HMG2 promote a triple-stranded complex formation between DNA containing the (GGA/TCC)11 repeat and oligonucleotides of d(GGA)11 probably due to G:G base pairing. The activity is to reduce association time and requirements of Mg2+ and oligonucleotide concentrations. The HMG box of SRY, the protein determining male-sex differentiation, also has the activity, suggesting that it is not restricted to the HMG-box domains derived from HMG1/2 but is common to those from other members of the HMG-box family of proteins. Interestingly, the box-AB and box-B of HMG1 bend DNA containing the repeat, but SRY fails to bend in a circularization assay. The difference suggests that the two activities of association-promotion and DNA bending are distinct. These results suggest that the HMG-box domain has a novel activity of promoting the association between GGA repeats which might be involved in higher-order architecture of chromatin.
96	NR	8968078	Thioredoxin (TRX), a disulfide-reducing intracellular protein, functions as a cellular defense mechanism against oxidative stress. In this study, we asked whether expression of TRX, glutathione-thiol transferase pi, and high mobility group protein 1 (HMG-1) genes is enhanced in human hepatocellular carcinoma and whether expression of these genes is associated with sensitivity to cisplatin. Both TRX and HMG-1 were co-overexpressed in almost all cancerous lesions in comparison to normal tissue in surgically resected hepatocellular carcinomas of 20 patients. Tumor sensitivity to cisplatin [cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II)], but not to mitomycin C or doxorubicin, correlated with mRNA levels of TRX in cancer tissue. TRX and HMG-1 may be useful tumor markers, and TRX might be also a useful marker for sensitivity to cisplatin in human hepatocellular carcinomas.
96	NR	8942984	DNA molecules containing inosine in place of guanosine and/or 2,6-diaminopurine in place of adenine have been synthesized and tested as substrates for binding of sequence-selective ligands, both small and large. Footprinting patterns reveal that the binding sites for AT- or GC-specific antibiotics (distamycin or mithramycin, respectively) are completely changed in the modified DNAs, as expected for direct sequence readout involving contact with the purine 2-amino group. However, we also find large changes in the binding of HMG-D, a member of the HMG-1 family of chromosomal proteins, pointing to an indirect influence of the exocyclic amino group on ligand binding via an effect on the deformability of the double helix. This interpretation is confirmed by the finding that deoxyuridine-containing poly- and oligonucleotides, which lack the exocyclic methyl group of thymidine in the major groove, interact 5-10 times more strongly with HMG-D than do their counterparts containing natural nucleotides.
96	NR	8981119	The use of pure follicle stimulating hormone (pFSH) and highly purified FSH (FSH-HP) versus the combinations pFSH/human menopausal gonadotrophin (HMG) and FSH HP/HMG, respectively, was compared for stimulating follicular development after gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonist (GnRHa) suppression in women undergoing in vitro fertilization (IVF)-embryo transfer. Two consecutive prospective, randomized studies were carried out at the Assisted Reproduction Unit of the Hospital Clinic i Provincial in Barcelona, a tertiary care setting. Two groups of 188 (study 1) and 252 (study 2) consecutive infertile patients respectively, scheduled for IVF-embryo transfer were included. Pretreatment with leuprolide acetate (long protocol) was followed by gonadotrophin treatment in all patients. In study 1, 92 patients received i.m. pFSH alone (group pFSH) and 96 were treated with the combination of i.m. pFSH and i.m. HMG (group HMG-1). In study 2, 123 patients received s.c. FSH-HP alone (group FSH-HP) and 129 patients were given the combination of s.c. FSH-HP and i.m. HMG (group HMG-2). Main outcome measures included follicular development, oocyte retrieval, fertilized oocytes, duration and dose of gonadotrophin therapy, and clinical pregnancy. There were no significant differences between pFSH and pFSH/HMG nor between FSH-HP and FSH-HP/HMG cycles with regard to the number of ampoules of medication used, day of human chorionic gonadotrophin (HCG) administration, mean peak serum oestradiol concentrations, number of follicles punctured, and number of oocytes aspirated, embryos transferred, or pregnancies. We conclude that urinary FSH (either purified of highly purified) alone is as effective as the conventional combination of urinary FSH/HMG for ovarian stimulation under pituitary suppression in IVF cycles. Therefore, they can be used interchangeably in IVF programmes.
96	NR	8918589	HLA class II alleles (DNA typing) and antibodies to HMG-1,2,14,17 proteins and H1 histone were determined in three predominantly Caucasian groups of patients with pulmonary hypertension (PHT). Forty-four adults had primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH), 42 children had PPH, and 41 children had PHT associated with anatomically large congenital pulmonary to systemic shunts (PHT + shunt). The HLA class II alleles in the Caucasian patients were compared with those of 51 healthy Caucasian controls. Eight (18%) of 44 sera from adults with PPH bound HMG-14 and 23 (52%) bound H1. None of 42 sera from children with PPH bound either HMG-14/17 or HMG-1/2, whereas four (10%) bound H1. In the PHT + shunt group of 41 children, two (5%) bound HMG-14, one (3%) bound HMG-17, four (10%) bound HMG-1 and/or HMG-2, and six (15%) bound H1. Among the 12 HMG antibody-positive patients, HLA-DQ6 was present in nine of 10 HLA typed patients (six PPH adults and three PHT + shunt children), seven of whom had antibodies to HMG-14 and one to HMG-17. The 100% frequency of HLA-DQ6 in seven Caucasian patients with antibodies to HMG-14/17 was statistically significant when compared with the 41% frequency of -DQ6 present in 51 healthy Caucasian controls (pc = 0.027, pc = Bonferroni correction, OR = 21.3). In contrast, when compared with controls, 25 patients with PPH and anti-H1 antibodies (21 adults and four children) had increased frequencies of HLA-DQ7 and -DR5 (60% versus 29%, P = 0.010, OR = 3.6 and 48% versus 22%, P = 0.018, OR = 3.4), which were not significant after correction. In essence, antibodies to HMG-14 and to H1 proteins were present predominantly in adults with PPH, suggesting that the pattern of response to HMG-14/17 was similar to that previously reported in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and drug-induced autoimmunity. This is the first report of an association between autoantibodies directed against HMG and H1 with immunogenetic markers. These data suggest that a subset of patients with PPH may have an autoimmune disease.
96	NR	9047378	The conserved lymphokine elements-0 (CLE0) in the IL5 promoter is essential for the expression of IL-5. Here, we report the cloning and expression of a cDNA encoding a novel CLE0-binding protein, CLEBP-1 from a mouse Th2 clone, D10.G4.1. Interestingly, it was found that the CLEBP1 cDNA sequence was almost identical to the sequences of known high mobility group-1 (HMG1) cDNAs. When expressed as a recombinant fusion protein in Escherichia coli, CLEBP-1 was shown to bind to the IL5-CLE0 element in electrophoretic mobility-shift assays (EMSA) and southwestern blot analysis. The CLEBP-1 fusion protein cross-reacts with and-HMG-1/2 in Western blot analysis. It also binds to the CLE0 elements of IL4, GMCSF and GCSF genes. CLEBP-1 and closely related HMG-1 and HMG-2 proteins may play key roles in facilitating the expression of the lymphokine genes that contain CLE0 elements.
96	NR	8914452	NA
96	NR	8913860	A number of tandemly repeated DNA sequences have the ability to form hairpin structures by forming non-standard base pairs. When (GCC)15 and (GGC)15 strands are annealed together, the expected duplex is the only product. However, when (GCC)15 is annealed with (GCC)10, depending on the relative concentrations, up to five complexes can be detected in native gels. Three of these species are susceptible to limited digestion by Exo VII, suggesting they are duplexes containing single stranded tails. The remaining two bands are resistant to the enzyme, and have low mobility on native gels, consistent with branched structures. The latter complexes bind HMG box proteins, members of a highly abundant class of non-histone proteins of the nucleus. These proteins, modeled in this study by the second box fragment from rat HMG1, HMGb, interact strongly with branched or chemically modified DNA, relative to normal duplexes. The expansion of triplet repeats in genomic DNA is associated with tumor formation as well with a variety of heritable neurologiocal disorders. It is our thesis that the stability of branched intermediate structures that arise in replication of these sequences and promote expansion can be influenced directly by the presence of two highly abundant proteins in the cell nucleus: the HMG box proteins, HMG1/2, and the histone H1, which associates with HMG1/2.
97	DR	14668429	Heat shock proteins have been implicated as endogenous activators for dendritic cells (DCs). Without tissue distress or death, these intracellular molecules are inaccessible to surface receptor(s) on DCs, possibly to avoid uncontrolled DC activation and breakdown of immunologic tolerance. We herein addressed this hypothesis in transgenic mice by enforcing cell surface expression of gp96, a ubiquitous heat shock protein of the endoplasmic reticulum. Although a pan-specific promoter is used for transgene expression, neither the expression level nor the tissue distribution of the endogenous gp96 was altered by this maneuver. However, cell surface gp96 induced significant DC activations and spontaneous lupus-like autoimmune diseases, even though the development/functions of lymphocytic compartments were unaltered. Using a bone marrow chimera approach, we further demonstrated that both DC activation and autoimmunity elicited by cell surface gp96 are dependent on the downstream adaptor protein MyD88 for signaling by Toll/IL-1 receptor family. Our study not only established the proinflammatory property of cell surface gp96 in vivo, but also suggested a chronic stimulation of DCs by gp96 as a pathway to initiate spontaneous autoimmune diseases.
97	PR	14634130	The IL-1R/Toll-like receptor (TLR) superfamily of receptors has a key role in innate immunity and inflammation. In this study, we report that streptococcal cell wall (SCW)-induced joint inflammation is predominantly dependent on TLR-2 signaling, since TLR-2-deficient mice were unable to develop either joint swelling or inhibition of cartilage matrix synthesis. Myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88) is a Toll/IL-1R domain containing adaptor molecule known to have a central role in both IL-1R/IL-18R and TLR signaling. Mice deficient for MyD88 did not develop SCW-induced arthritis; both joint swelling and disturbance of cartilage chondrocyte anabolic function was completely abolished. Local levels of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines in synovial tissue washouts were strongly reduced in MyD88-deficient mice. Histology confirmed the pivotal role of MyD88 in acute joint inflammation. TLR-2-deficient mice still allow influx of inflammatory cells into the joint cavity, although the number of cells was markedly reduced. No influx of inflammatory cells was seen in joints of MyD88-deficient mice. In addition, cartilage matrix proteoglycan loss was completely absent in MyD88 knockout mice. These findings clearly demonstrated that MyD88 is a key component in SCW-induced joint inflammation. Since agonists of the Toll-like pathway are abundantly involved in both septic and rheumatoid arthritis, targeting of MyD88 may be a novel therapy in inflammatory joint diseases.
97	NR	14515255	In allergy and asthma, the fine balance between the T helper (Th) 1, Th2 and T regulatory cytokine responses appears to be shifted towards Th2. Here, we report that synthetic lipopeptides which contain the typical lipid part of the lipoprotein of gram-negative bacteria stimulate a distinct regulatory cytokine pattern and inhibit several Th2 cell-related phenomena. The most potent analogue of synthetic lipopeptides, lipopeptide CGP 40774 (LP40) was not active in MyD88-deficient mice and stimulated Toll-like receptor (TLR)-2, but not TLR-4. LP40 potentiated the production of IFN-gamma and IL-10, but not IL-4 and IL-5 by human T cells. In addition, triggering of TLR-2 by lipopeptides promoted the in vitro differentiation of naive T cells towards IL-10- and IFN-gamma-producing T cells and suppressed IL-4 production by Th2 cells. Accordingly, LP40 inhibited IgE production induced by allergen, anti-IgD antibody, Nippostrongylus brasiliensis or murine acquired immunodeficiency virus. Furthermore, ovalbumin-induced lung eosinophilic inflammation was abolished and Schistosoma mansoni egg-induced granuloma size and eosinophil counts were suppressed in mice by LP40. These results demonstrate that stimulation of TLR-2 by lipopeptides represents a novel way for possible treatment of allergy and asthma by regulating the disrupted cytokine balance.
97	DR	12901949	Roles for Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are emerging in conditions such as sepsis syndrome, systemic lupus erythromatosis, rheumatoid arthritis and asthma, suggesting that the selective targeting of TLRs might be useful therapeutically. TLRs are defined by the presence of extracellular leucine-rich repeats and an intracellular Toll/interleukin-1 receptor domain, and play a role in host defence and inflammation. Signalling pathways activated by TLRs show remarkable similarity to those activated by the pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-1 (the receptor for which also has a Toll/interleukin-1 receptor domain), although adaptor proteins specific for certain TLRs are starting to emerge (e.g. Mal and Trif). The common signalling pathways used by all members of the TLR superfamily are being targeted, with drugs that block nuclear factor-kappaB and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase in clinical development for diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and psoriasis. As we learn more about TLR signal transduction, more options are presenting themselves for pharmacological targeting.
97	DR	12739022	AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: betaTC-tet (H2(k)) is a conditional insulinoma cell line derived from transgenic mice expressing a tetracycline-regulated oncogene. Transgenic expression of several proteins implicated in the apoptotic pathways increase the resistance of betaTC-tet cells in vitro. We tested in vivo the sensitivity of the cells to rejection and the protective effect of genetic alterations in NOD mice. METHODS: betaTC-tet cells and genetically engineered lines expressing Bcl-2 (CDM3D), a dominant negative mutant of MyD88 or SOCS-1 were transplanted in diabetic female NOD mice or in male NOD mice with diabetes induced by high-dose streptozotocin. Survival of functional cell grafts in NOD-scid mice was also analyzed after transfer of splenocytes from diabetic NOD mice. Autoreactive T-cell hybridomas and splenocytes from diabetic NOD mice were stimulated by betaTC-tet cells. RESULTS: betaTC-tet cells and genetically engineered cell lines were all similarly rejected in diabetic NOD mice and in NOD-scid mice after splenocyte transfer. In 3- to 6-week-old male NOD mice treated with high-dose streptozotocin, the cells temporarily survived, in contrast with C57BL/6 mice treated with high-dose streptozotocin (indefinite survival) and untreated 3- to 6-week-old male NOD mice (rejection). The protective effect of high-dose streptozotocin was lost in older male NOD mice. betaTC-tet cells did not stimulate autoreactive T-cell hybridomas, but induced IL-2 secretion by splenocytes from diabetic NOD mice. CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: The autoimmune process seems to play an important role in the destruction of betaTC-tet cells in NOD mice. Genetic manipulations intended at increasing the resistance of beta cells were inefficient. Similar approaches should be tested in vivo as well as in vitro. High dose streptozotocin influences immune rejection and should be used with caution.
97	DR	12591910	Inflammatory arthritis is associated with the release of a network of key cytokines. In T cell receptor transgenic K/BxN mice interleukin (IL)-1 plays a key role in joint swelling and destruction, as suggested by the ability of anti-IL-1receptor (IL-1R) antibody treatment to delay the onset and slow the progression of this disease. This mechanism is dependent on the signaling pathway intermediary myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88), such that neither IL-1R nor MyD88-deficient mice developed visually detectable synovitis after transfer of arthritogenic sera. The Toll-like receptors (TLRs) share the same signaling pathway through MyD88 as the IL-1R. The administration of a TLR-4 ligand, lipopolysaccharide, concomitant with arthritogenic serum in IL-1 receptor-deficient mice resulted in acute paw swelling, but not in MyD88-deficient mice. Also, serum transferred arthritis was not sustained in TLR-4 mutant mice compared with controls. These results suggest that innate immune functions via TLR-4 might perpetuate inflammatory mechanisms and bypass the need for IL-1 in chronic joint inflammation.
97	DR	12531807	Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is an autoimmune disease characterized by the persistent presence of antiphospholipid antibodies (aPLs) and recurrent thrombosis or fetal loss. The thrombophilic state has been partially related to the induction of a proinflammatory and procoagulant endothelial cell (EC) phenotype induced by anti-beta(2)-glycoprotein I (beta(2)-GPI) antibodies that bind beta(2)-GPI expressed on the EC surface. Anti-beta(2)-GPI antibody binding has been shown to induce nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappa B) translocation leading to a proinflammatory EC phenotype similar to that elicited by interaction with microbial products (lipopolysaccharide [LPS]) and proinflammatory cytokines (interleukin 1 beta [IL-1 beta], tumor necrosis factor alpha [TNF-alpha]). However, the upstream signaling events are not characterized yet. To investigate the endothelial signaling cascade activated by anti-beta(2)-GPI antibodies, we transiently cotransfected immortalized human microvascular endothelial cells (HMEC-1) with dominant-negative constructs of different components of the pathway (Delta TRAF2, Delta TRAF6, Delta MyD88) together with reporter genes (NF-kappa B luciferase and pCMV-beta-galactosidase). Results showed that both human anti-beta(2)-GPI IgM monoclonal antibodies as well as polyclonal affinity-purified anti-beta(2)-GPI IgG display a signaling cascade comparable to that activated by LPS or IL-1. Delta TRAF6 and Delta MyD88 significantly abrogate antibody-induced as well as IL-1- or LPS-induced NF-kappa B activation, whereas Delta TRAF2 (involved in NF-kappa B activation by TNF) does not affect it. Moreover, anti- beta(2)-GPI antibodies and LPS followed the same time kinetic of IL-1 receptor-activated kinase (IRAK) phosphorylation, suggesting an involvement of the toll-like receptor (TLR) family. Our findings demonstrate that anti-beta(2)-GPI antibodies react with their antigen likely associated to a member of the TLR/IL-1 receptor family on the EC surface and directly induce activation.
97	NR	12472376	The intermediate conductance Ca2+-activated K+ (IK) channel is distinguished from the functionally related Ca2+-activated K+ channels of smaller and larger unitary conductance by its molecular structure, pharmacology, tissue distribution and physiology. Like many K+ channels, IK is an assembly of four identical subunits each spanning the membrane six times and each contributing equally to the K+ selectivity pore positioned centrally in the complex. The IK channel gains its high sensitivity to intracellular Ca2+ from tightly bound calmodulin, and its activity is independent of the membrane potential. Several toxins including charybdotoxin and the more selective mutant, Glu32-charybdotoxin, maurotoxin and stichodactyla toxin potently block IK channels. Among blockers of the IK channel are also several small organic molecules including the antimycotic clotrimazole and the close analogues TRAM-34 and ICA-17043, as well as the antihypertensive, nitrendipine. The IK channel is distributed in peripheral tissues, including secretory epithelia and blood cells, but it appears absent from neuronal and muscle tissue. An important physiological role of the IK channel is to help maintain large electrical gradients for the sustained transport of ions such as Ca2+ influx that controls T lymphocyte (T cell) proliferation. In this review, special attention is given to an analysis of the use of IK blockers as potential immunosuppressants for the treatment of autoimmune disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease and multiple sclerosis.
97	NR	12208854	The lung innate immune response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) coordinates cellular inflammation, mediator, and protease release essential for host defense but deleterious in asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and cystic fibrosis. In vitro, LPS signals to the transcription factors NFkappaB via TLR4, MyD88, and IL-1R-associated kinase (IRAK), to AP-1 by mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases, and via an alternate route in IRAK-deficient mice, but the in vivo lung signaling pathway(s) are not understood. We investigated the role of Akt and Erk1/2 as LPS intensely stimulates granulocyte/macrophage-colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) release, and neutralizing GM-CSF profoundly suppressed LPS-induced inflammation, suppressed expression and activity of lung proteases, significantly reduced GM-CSF and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) mRNA expression, and dampened nuclear localization of both NFkappaB (p50/65) and AP-1. LPS markedly activated Akt and Erk1/2, but not p38, in a GM-CSF-dependent manner in direct temporal association with NFkappaB and AP-1 activation. Pharmacological inhibition of Akt or Erk activation in LPS-treated tracheal explants ex vivo inhibited the release of GM-CSF. These data implicate GM-CSF-dependent activation of Akt in the amplification of this response and demonstrate the role of Erks rather than p38 in lung LPS inflammatory responses. Inhibition of GM-CSF may be of therapeutic benefit in inflammatory diseases in which LPS contributes to lung damage.
97	DR	11948342	Autoreactive B cells are present in the lymphoid tissues of healthy individuals, but typically remain quiescent. When this homeostasis is perturbed, the formation of self-reactive antibodies can have serious pathological consequences. B cells expressing an antigen receptor specific for self-immunoglobulin-gamma (IgG) make a class of autoantibodies known as rheumatoid factor (RF). Here we show that effective activation of RF+ B cells is mediated by IgG2a-chromatin immune complexes and requires the synergistic engagement of the antigen receptor and a member of the MyD88-dependent Toll-like receptor (TLR) family. Inhibitor studies implicate TLR9. These data establish a critical link between the innate and adaptive immune systems in the development of systemic autoimmune disease and explain the preponderance of autoantibodies reactive with nucleic acid-protein particles. The unique features of this dual-engagement pathway should facilitate the development of therapies that specifically target autoreactive B cells.
97	DR	11836257	Recent studies have initiated a paradigm shift in the understanding of the function of heat shock proteins (HSP). It is now clear that HSP can and do exit mammalian cells, interact with cells of the immune system, and exert immunoregulatory effects. We recently demonstrated that exogenously added HSP70 possesses potent cytokine activity, with the ability to bind with high affinity to the plasma membrane, elicit a rapid intracellular Ca(2+) flux, activate NF-kappaB, and up-regulate the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines in human monocytes. Here for the first time, we report that HSP70-induced proinflammatory cytokine production is mediated via the MyD88/IRAK/NF-kappaB signal transduction pathway and that HSP70 utilizes both TLR2 (receptor for Gram-positive bacteria) and TLR4 (receptor for Gram-negative bacteria) to transduce its proinflammatory signal in a CD14-dependent fashion. These studies now pave the way for the development of highly effective pharmacological or molecular tools that will either up-regulate or suppress HSP70-induced functions in conditions where HSP70 effects are desirable (cancer) or disorders where HSP70 effects are undesirable (arthritis and arteriosclerosis).
97	NR	11717451	Adoptive transfer experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (AT-EAE), a disease resembling multiple sclerosis, is induced in rats by myelin basic protein (MBP)-activated CD4(+) T lymphocytes. By patch-clamp analysis, encephalitogenic rat T cells stimulated repeatedly in vitro expressed a unique channel phenotype ("chronically activated") with large numbers of Kv1.3 voltage-gated channels (approximately 1500 per cell) and small numbers of IKCa1 Ca(2+)-activated K(+) channels (approximately 50-120 per cell). In contrast, resting T cells displayed 0-10 Kv1.3 and 10-20 IKCa1 channels per cell ("quiescent" phenotype), whereas T cells stimulated once or twice expressed approximately 200 Kv1.3 and approximately 350 IKCa1 channels per cell ("acutely activated" phenotype). Consistent with their channel phenotype, [(3)H]thymidine incorporation by MBP-stimulated chronically activated T cells was suppressed by the peptide ShK, a blocker of Kv1.3 and IKCa1, and by an analog (ShK-Dap(22)) engineered to be highly specific for Kv1.3, but not by a selective IKCa1 blocker (TRAM-34). The combination of ShK-Dap(22) and TRAM-34 enhanced the suppression of MBP-stimulated T cell proliferation. Based on these in vitro results, we assessed the efficacy of K(+) channel blockers in AT-EAE. Specific and simultaneous blockade of the T cell channels by ShK or by a combination of ShK-Dap(22) plus TRAM-34 prevented lethal AT-EAE. Blockade of Kv1.3 alone with ShK-Dap(22), but not of IKCa1 with TRAM-34, was also effective. When administered after the onset of symptoms, ShK or the combination of ShK-Dap(22) plus TRAM-34 greatly ameliorated the clinical course of both moderate and severe AT-EAE. We conclude that selective targeting of Kv1.3, alone or with IKCa1, may provide an effective new mode of therapy for multiple sclerosis.
97	NR	11395926	Liposomes prepared from naturally occurring biodegradable and nontoxic lipids are good candidates for local delivery of therapeutic agents. Treatment of arthritis by intra-articular administration of anti-inflammatory drugs encapsulated in liposomes prolongs the residence time of the drug in the joint. We have previously shown that intra-articular injection of human lactoferrin (hLf), a glycoprotein that possesses anti-inflammatory and antimicrobial activities, into mice with collagen-induced arthritis reduces inflammation. We have now investigated the possibility of using liposome-entrapped hLf as a delivery system to prolong hLf retention at sites of local inflammation such as the rheumatoid joint. Entrapment of hLf in negatively charged liposomes enhanced its accumulation in cultured human synovial fibroblasts from rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients, compared with positively charged formulations or free protein. However, in the presence of synovial fluid, positively charged liposomes with entrapped hLf were more stable than the negatively charged formulations. In vivo experiments in mice with collagen-induced arthritis showed that the positive liposomes were more efficient in prolonging the residence time of hLf in the inflamed joint as compared with other liposomes. Thus, the amount of hLf retained in the joint after 2 hr was 60% of the injected dose in the case of positive liposomes and only 16% for negative pH-sensitive liposomes. The results suggest that entrapment of hLf in positively charged liposomes may modify its pharmacodynamic profile and be of therapeutic benefit in the treatment of RA and other local inflammatory conditions.
97	DR	10967106	Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus is an autoimmune disease in which pancreatic islet beta cells are destroyed by a combination of immunological and inflammatory mechanisms. In particular, cytokine-induced production of nitric oxide has been shown to correlate with beta cell apoptosis and/or inhibition of insulin secretion. In the present study, we investigated whether the interleukin (IL)-1beta intracellular signal transduction pathway could be blocked by overexpression of dominant negative forms of the IL-1 receptor interacting protein MyD88. We show that overexpression of the Toll domain or the lpr mutant of MyD88 in betaTc-Tet cells decreased nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) activation upon IL-1beta and IL-1beta/interferon (IFN)-gamma stimulation. Inducible nitric oxide synthase mRNA accumulation and nitrite production, which required the simultaneous presence of IL-1beta and IFN-gamma, were also suppressed by approximately 70%, and these cells were more resistant to cytokine-induced apoptosis as compared with parental cells. The decrease in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion induced by IL-1beta and IFN-gamma was however not prevented. This was because these dysfunctions were induced by IFN-gamma alone, which decreased cellular insulin content and stimulated insulin exocytosis. These results demonstrate that IL-1beta is involved in inducible nitric oxide synthase gene expression and induction of apoptosis in mouse beta cells but does not contribute to impaired glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. Furthermore, our data show that IL-1beta cellular actions can be blocked by expression of MyD88 dominant negative proteins and, finally, that cytokine-induced beta cell secretory dysfunctions are due to the action of IFN-gamma.
97	NR	10884437	The antimycotic clotrimazole, a potent inhibitor of the intermediate-conductance calcium-activated K(+) channel, IKCa1, is in clinical trials for the treatment of sickle cell disease and diarrhea and is effective in ameliorating the symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis. However, inhibition of cytochrome P450 enzymes by clotrimazole limits its therapeutic value. We have used a rational design strategy to develop a clotrimazole analog that selectively inhibits IKCa1 without blocking cytochrome P450 enzymes. A screen of 83 triarylmethanes revealed the pharmacophore for channel block to be different from that required for cytochrome P450 inhibition. The "IKCa1-pharmacophore" consists of a (2-halogenophenyl)diphenylmethane moiety substituted by an unsubstituted polar pi-electron-rich heterocycle (pyrazole or tetrazole) or a -CN group, whereas cytochrome P450 inhibition absolutely requires the imidazole ring. A series of pyrazoles, acetonitriles, and tetrazoles were synthesized and found to selectively block IKCa1. TRAM-34 (1-[(2-chlorophenyl)diphenylmethyl]-1H-pyrazole) inhibits the cloned and the native IKCa1 channel in human T lymphocytes with a K(d) of 20-25 nM and is 200- to 1,500-fold selective over other ion channels. Using TRAM-34, we show that blocking IKCa1 in human lymphocytes, in the absence of P450-inhibition, results in suppression of mitogen-stimulated [(3)H]thymidine incorporation of preactivated lymphocytes with EC(50)-values of 100 nM-1 microM depending on the donor. Combinations of TRAM-34 and cyclosporin A are more effective in suppressing lymphocyte mitogenesis than either compound alone. Our studies suggest that TRAM-34 and related compounds may hold therapeutic promise as immunosuppressants.
97	NR	8659945	Surgical delay is one method of enhancing the vascularity of the lower abdominal transverse rectus abdominis musculocutaneous (TRAM) flap. The outcome of 7 patients who underwent surgical delay (by ligating both superficial and deep inferior epigastric vessels bilaterally) a week prior to definitive TRAM flap elevation is described. Three patients were smokers, 3 were obese, and 1 was an asthmatic on medication. A satisfactory aesthetic result was achieved in all patients and the complications that occurred were minor. Two patients developed minor skin necrosis due to inadequate trimming of zone 4 on the contralateral side to the pedicle and there were 3 cases of fat necrosis, which occurred below Scarpa's fascia. Surgical delay is a useful technique of breast reconstruction. It allows the flap to be centered safely in the lower abdomen. In the high-risk patient, delay may prevent the need for microsurgery or the sacrifice of both recti.
98	DR	15179767	Medullary thyroid cancer is a rare, neuroendocrine, tumor. It arises from parafollicular or C-cells with the ability to produce and secrete different bioactive substances like calcitonin (TC) and CEA (1-5) TC is ideal tumor marker in early diagnosis, in patents' follow up and in evaluation of their treatment. TC determinations after ca/pentagastrine stimulation test give us even more accurate results and the procedure is used for biochemical family screening. MTC occurs as a sporadic tumor or in hereditary settings MEN 2A, MEN 2B and FMCT. Germ/line point mutations in RET proto/onkogene are responsible for tumor arise and inheritance of settings. Genetic screening provides information of these RET mutations in family members even before pathologic changes occur. These individuals with MEN 2A, 2B and FMCT characteristic RET mutations are almost certain to acquire MTC (95% penetrance) in their lives and are candidates for preventive total thyroidectomy (TT), with or without central neck dissection (CND). Surgery is still the treatment of choice for MTC and only C-cell hyperplasia and early stage of MTC can be cured. Prophylactic thyroid surgery eliminates the possibility of MTC but doesn't influence appearance of other diseases (PHEO, HPTH) of MEN 2 syndromes.
98	DR	15179755	NA
98	DR	14870788	Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) is an inherited disease caused by germline mutations in the RET proto-oncogene. The most distinctive MEN 2 variants are MEN 2A, MEN 2B and familial medullary thyroid cancer (FMTC). The hallmark of these syndromes is the development of medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), which occurs in almost all patients with MEN 2 syndromes. Other endocrinopathies are variably expressed. Pheochromocytoma and hyperparathyroidism occur in patients with MEN 2A with a frequency of about 50% and 30%, respectively. In this paper we summarize the most relevant diagnostic methods to detect and monitor MTC, pheochromocytoma and hyperparathyroidism.
98	NR	14870785	Genetic testing is the appropriate procedure in MEN 2A syndrome for the early diagnosis of medullary carcinoma even at a preclinical stage. Prophylactic total thyroidectomy represents the standard preventive and therapeutic surgical approach in the treatment of medullary thyroid carcinoma in MEN 2A syndrome. Our experience has confirmed the presence of CCH and medullary thyroid carcinoma even in clinically negative patients, in agreement with reports in the literature.
98	DR	14870784	Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) responds very poorly to chemotherapy. Mutations in the RET gene are critical for MTC pathogenesis. RET therefore represents a rational target for the development of novel MTC therapies. The accumulation of evidence from laboratory studies strongly suggests that PP1 inhibitor is a cytostatic agent for cells expressing RET oncoproteins. PP1 functions as a potent and selective inhibitor of RET oncoprotein phosphorylation, promoting its proteasomal degradation.
98	NR	14758805	NA
98	NR	14739494	A unilateral, apparently sporadic pheochromocytoma was removed from the right adrenal of a 73-yr-old Caucasian woman. At the time of surgery, germline DNA from the patient was not available. However, a continuous cell line (KNA) established from the tumor showed a heterozygous sequence variant TGC (cysteine) to TGG (tryptophan) in exon 10, codon 611 of the RET proto-oncogene. Subsequent genetic testing of the patient and her offspring revealed the same base-change in herself, one daughter, one son, and the only grandson, confirming hereditary disease classified as MEN2A-2. Clinical follow up of the patient revealed elevated serum calcitonin after 6 yr. Thyroidectomy was performed and revealed a small medullary thyroid carcinoma. The patient's children thus far show no evidence of MEN2, but C-cell hyperplasia has been diagnosed in the grandson. Our serendipitous finding of a MEN2A-2 mutation in a patient with initial diagnosis of late onset, unilateral, "sporadic" pheochromocytoma would argue for routine mutation screening of even elderly patients presenting with a pheochromocytoma.
98	DR	14739491	Ret is a developmentally regulated tyrosine kinase involved in formation and maintenance of the nervous system. Ret mutations predisposing to pheochromocytomas and medullary thyroid carcinomas occur in multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes 2A and 2B. Biochemical studies have demonstrated overexpression of Ret mRNA and protein in pheochromocytomas compared to normal adrenal medulla. However, the cellular distribution of Ret in the normal human adrenal and in hyperplastic lesions that antecede pheochromocytomas are unclear. The present investigation was undertaken to resolve the histological distribution of Ret in the normal human adrenal, in pheochromocytomas evolving from adrenal medullary hyperplasia in MEN2A and in sporadic pheochromocytomas. Ret expression was studied by immunohistochemistry using both a polyclonal and a monoclonal antibody, with confirmation by immunoblotting of representative cases. Only occasional cells stained for Ret in the normal adrenal, consistent with the distribution in adult adrenals of other species. Heterogeneous, progressively increased Ret expression was observed during the evolution of pheochromocytomas. In both normal and neoplastic adrenal, the most intense immunoreactivity was observed in cells with neuron-like features. Our finding that Ret is not expressed at high levels in the early stages of disease suggests that elucidation of mechanisms that regulate Ret expression is required for understanding the pathobiology of MEN2A. The association of high-level Ret expression with neuronal morphology suggests that the variable overexpression of Ret in pheochromocytomas might in part be an epiphenomenon, reflecting the known phenotypic plasticity of these tumors.
98	DR	14668737	BACKGROUND: Once familial medullary thyroid carcinoma gene carrier status is established, thyroidectomy must be performed in infancy for mutations in exon 10, but in familial medullary thyroid carcinoma with non-cysteine RET mutations, which is characterized by a late onset of C-cell disease, the appropriate timing of thyroidectomy is unclear. METHODS: We analyzed the cases of 76 patients who underwent thyroidectomy (mean age, 35.2 years); 66 patients underwent concomitant lymphadenectomy. RESULTS: Before the operation, 35 patients had abnormal basal calcitonin levels. Nine and 30 patients had negative or positive pentagastrin test results, respectively. We found normal thyroid in 4% of the patients, C-cell hyperplasia in 29% of the patients, medullary thyroid carcinoma in 67% of the patients (microscopic in 82.4%), and nodal metastases in 19.6% of the patients. The aggressiveness of the disease varied significantly between those patients with preoperative positive pentagastrin test results and those patients with high basal calcitonin levels, with a surgical cure rate of 60% and 34.3%, respectively. All patient who did not achieve cure had high basal preoperative calcitonin levels, which were related to macroscopic medullary thyroid carcinoma and nodal metastases in 5 of 9 patients. CONCLUSION: Thyroidectomy should not be delayed until basal calcitonin level becomes abnormal, at which time advanced disease may be present. As soon as the pentagastrin stimulation test becomes abnormal, operation should be undertaken on early staged disease to achieve cure for the patient. When performed while pentagastrin stimulation test is still negative, thyroidectomy may be truly prophylactic and should be recommended at 5 to 6 years.
98	DR	14666655	BACKGROUND: Activating mutations in the RET receptor tyrosine kinase are responsible for the development of medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) in persons with Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia type 2. We hypothesized that STI571 (Gleevec) would inhibit RET kinase and be a useful agent in the treatment of MTC. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We determined the IC50 of STI571 for RET using an in vitro kinase assay and also examined the effects of STI571 on cellular proliferation and viability in TT cells, a human MTC cell line. RESULTS: The average in vitro IC50 of STI571 for RET is 37 microM +/- 4 microM. Additionally, TT cells incubated with 10 microM STI571 for up to 8 days showed no apparent reduction in cell proliferation or viability. Higher concentrations of STI571, from 25 to 100 microM, induced necrosis of TT cells. CONCLUSION: The concentrations of STI571 required to significantly inhibit RET and to inhibit TT cell proliferation are not clinically achievable. We conclude that STI571 is not likely to be an effective treatment for MTC.
98	DR	14663408	NA
98	DR	14628904	Multiple endocrine neoplasia Type 2 is a rare familial cancer syndrome transmitted in an autosomal dominant manner. It is characterized by the association of medullary thyroid carcinoma with pheochromocytoma and hyperparathyroidism. Medullary thyroid carcinoma, present in virtually all patients, is the principal cause of death. In 1993, germline mutations in the RET proto-oncogene were identified as the underlying cause of the syndrome. Genetic screening of at-risk family members can now be performed with high specificity and sensitivity. The ability to determine gene carrier status at a preclinical stage is of great value as it allows early prophylactic thyroidectomy. The specific RET codon mutation correlates with clinical variants of the syndrome, age at onset and aggressiveness of medullary thyroid carcinoma. This review will focus on mutational spectrum, genotype-phenotype correlations and clinical decisions based on genetic information.
98	DR	14618242	Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) occurs as a sporadic form or, less frequently, as an autosomal dominant inherited familial disorder. Germline mutations in the RET proto-oncogene in exons 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, and 16 are found in most of the familial cases (nearly 95%). Somatic mutations in sporadic MTC are detected in 23-69% of patients. The most frequent somatic mutation is located in exon 16 at codon 918, and only a small percentage of mutations are found in exons 10, 11, 13, and 15. We have searched for somatic mutations in Czech MTC patients using direct sequencing. We report here two new somatic missense mutations in exon 16 of the RET proto-oncogene associated with the sporadic MTC detected in two Czech men. A homozygous mutation at codon 922 TCC(Ser)-->CCC(Pro) as a result of loss of heterozygosity was revealed in the first patient. In the second one a heterozygous mutation at codon 930 ACG(Thr)-->ATG(Met) was found.
98	DR	14604749	NA
98	DR	14602786	Familial medullary thyroid carcinoma is related to germ-line mutations in the RET oncogene, mainly in cysteine codon 10 or 11, whereas noncysteine mutations in codons 13-15 are rare. We now report a new missense point mutation in exon 8 of the RET gene (1597G-->T) corresponding to a Gly(533)Cys substitution in the cysteine-rich domain of RET protein in 76 patients from a 6-generation Brazilian family with 229 subjects, with ascendants from Spain. It is likely that the mutation causes familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC), because no other mutation was found in RET, the mutation cosegregates with medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) or C cell hyperplasia (CCH) in patients subjected to surgery, and family members without the mutation are clinically unaffected. The histological analysis of 35 cases submitted to thyroidectomy revealed that 21 patients had MTC after the age of 40 yr and 8 before the age of 40 yr, 4 presented MTC or CCH before the age of 18 yr, 2 died due to MTC at the age of 53 and 60 yr, and CCH was found in a 5-yr-old child, suggesting a clinical heterogeneity. To improve the diagnosis of FMTC, analysis of exon 8 of RET should be considered in families with no identified classical RET mutations.
98	DR	14586073	We report the case of a 72 yr-old woman who underwent total thyroidectomy and resection of neck lymph nodes because of a firm nodule in the right lobe, which was consistent with medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) on cytological examination. Histology showed multifocal bilateral MTC; a 2 mm papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) was also detected in the right lobe, next to a focus of MTC; five cervical lymph nodes contained MTC. In one right perithyroidal lymph node, concurrent metastases of MTC and PTC were demonstrated. DNA analysis showed a point mutation in exon 14 at codon 804 of the RET proto-oncogene locus, as frequently found in cases of familial MTC (FMTC). To our knowledge, this case represents the first documented case of concurrent lymph node metastases of MTC and PTC in a patient with RET proto-oncogene germline mutation. We report this unique case, discuss related thyroid malignancies, and suggest possible underlying pathogenetic mechanisms.
98	NR	14569818	Molecular mutations in thyroid carcinomas have been well characterized and studied and consist of both germline and somatic genetic events. Mutations that are associated with tumorigenesis can be divided into 2 general categories: oncogene mutations and tumor suppressor gene mutations. Thyroid tumors and their characteristic molecular mutations are discussed in this review. The current practice in diagnostic testing for thyroid tumors also is examined.
98	NR	14561800	NA
98	DR	14561794	NA
98	DR	14557476	C cell hyperplasia is associated with medullary carcinoma of the thyroid in the inherited MEN2 syndromes, in which the great majority of cases have been shown to be due to a mutation in the RET oncogene. We report a study of a family with C cell hyperplasia and hypercalcitoninemia in which no cases of medullary carcinoma have yet occurred and which lacked an identifiable causative RET mutation. Four of the family members showed hypercalcitoninemia, and marked C cell hyperplasia was present in each of the three in whom thyroidectomy has been performed. We investigated the possible involvement of the SDHD gene, because somatic and germline mutations in this gene have been found in a variety of tumors of neural crest-derived tissue. A germline mutation in exon 2 of the SDHD gene (c149 A-G, His 50 Arg) was found in six members of the family; all the four available members with hypercalcitoninemia possessed the mutation. One of the five available members without hypercalcitoninemia, an 18-yr-old female, also showed the mutation. We conclude that we have identified a new syndrome, characterized by familial non-RET C cell hyperplasia. Our studies suggest that a mutation in SDHD may be causative. These observations have implications for apparently incidental cases of hypercalcitoninemia or C cell hyperplasia.
98	DR	14557473	Approximately 75% of pheochromocytomas are sporadic. Germline mutations in RET, VHL, SDHB, and SDHD have been shown to cause the 25% that are hereditary. Germline high penetrance gain-of-function RET mutations cause multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2, of which medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) and pheochromocytoma are components, whereas loss-of-function mutations cause Hirschprung disease (HSCR). A low-penetrance founder locus, in linkage disequilibrium with a RET ancestral haplotype comprising specific alleles at three intron (IVS) 1 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (haplotype 0) and SNP A45A, predisposes to the majority of isolated HSCR. A different low-penetrance locus, in linkage disequilibrium with IVS 1 haplotype 2 and SNP S836S, was associated with a subset of sporadic MTC. We, therefore, sought to determine whether RET might also be a low-penetrance gene for apparently sporadic pheochromocytoma. We analyzed 104 pheochromocytoma cases without germline mutations in RET, VHL, SDHD, and SDHB for their status at A45, S836, three IVS 1 SNPs, and a novel upstream insertion/deletion variant. Pheochromocytoma cases were not associated with either A45A or S836S, but we found that cases were associated with haplotype 0 (P = 0.032). However, unlike HSCR, this pheochromocytoma-associated haplotype 0 was not associated with A45A. Taken together with the strengthening of association with the addition of the 5' insertion/deletion variant data (P = 0.016), our observations suggest the presence of a low-penetrance pheochromocytoma susceptibility locus in a region upstream of the putative loci for HSCR and apparently sporadic MTC.
98	DR	14555929	NA
98	DR	14555660	RET/PTC rearrangements are believed to be tumor-initiating events in papillary thyroid carcinomas. We identified microsomal prostaglandin E2 synthase-1 (mPGES-1) as a RET/PTC-inducible gene through subtraction hybridization cloning and expression profiling with custom microarrays. The inducible prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) biosynthetic enzymes cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and mPGES-1 are up-regulated in many cancers. COX-2 is overexpressed in thyroid malignancies compared with benign nodules and normal thyroid tissues. Eicosanoids may promote tumorigenesis through effects on tumor cell growth, immune surveillance, and angiogenesis. Conditional RET/PTC1 or RET/PTC3 expression in PCCL3 thyroid cells markedly induced mPGES-1 and COX-2. PGE2 was the principal prostanoid and up-regulated (by approximately 60-fold), whereas hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid metabolites were decreased, consistent with shunting of prostanoid biosynthesis toward PGE2 by coactivation of the two enzymes. RET/PTC activated mPGES-1 gene transcription. Based on experiments with kinase inhibitors, with PCCL3 cell lines with doxycycline-inducible expression of RET/PTC mutants with substitutions of critical tyrosine residues in the kinase domain, and lines with inducible expression of activated mutants of H-RAS and MEK1, RET/PTC was found to regulate mPGES-1 through Shc-RAS-MEK-ERK. These data show a direct relationship between activation of a tyrosine kinase receptor oncogene and regulation of PGE2 biosynthesis. As enzymes involved in prostanoid biosynthesis can be targeted with pharmacological inhibitors, these findings may have therapeutic implications.
98	NR	14526122	We developed a procedure to detect the 7 point mutations at Cys634 of the proto-oncogene RET, which is responsible for medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC). Genomic DNA was prepared from blood samples obtained from normal and MTC-affected individuals belonging to a family with a history of the disease. The RET genotype for each individual was first established by performing restriction and sequencing analyses. Single-stranded target DNA was prepared by asymmetric polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of a 93-bp fragment containing Cys634. The target was annealed with pairs of prelabeled stacking oligonucleotides designed to create appropriate 7-nucleotide gaps, which served as the sites of subsequent hybridization with glass-immobilized 7-mer probes. The target-stacking oligonucleotide duplexes were hybridized with DNA chips containing a set of eight 7-mer probes designed to detect the wild-type sequence and the seven point mutations described. We tested two sets of immobilized probes containing internal or 5'-terminal codon-634 single-base variations. Both groups of probes were able to discriminatively identify the mutations. The hybridization patterns indicated that the disease in this family was due to the C634Y mutation, in accord with the original sequence analysis. The hybridization-based mutation assignment was additionally supported by determination of the control homozygous and heterozygous hybridization patterns produced with synthetic targets having the normal or codon 634 mutant sequences. The effects of mismatch type and nearest-neighbor sequences on the occurrence of false-positive (mismatched) hybridizations are discussed.
98	NR	14518256	NA
98	DR	14508694	NA
98	DR	14500395	All of the cases of medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) express the RET receptor tyrosine kinase. In essentially all of the hereditary cases and approximately 40% of the sporadic cases of MTC, the RET kinase is constitutively activated by mutation. This suggests that RET may be an effective therapeutic target for treatment of MTC. We show that the indolocarbazole derivatives, CEP-701 and CEP-751, inhibit RET in MTC cells. These compounds effectively inhibit RET phosphorylation in a dose-dependent manner at concentrations <100 nM in 0.5% serum and at somewhat higher concentrations in the presence of 16% serum. They also blocked the growth of these MTC cells in culture. CEP-751 and its prodrug, CEP-2563, also inhibited tumor growth in MTC cell xenografts. These results show that inhibiting RET can block the growth of MTC cells and may have a therapeutic benefit in MTC.
98	NR	12975039	NA
98	DR	12951842	Standard cytogenetic data are reported for benign and malignant thyroid and pituitary tumors. These identified chromosomal rearrangements activating RET and PPAR gamma 1 in a subset of papillary (PTCs) and follicular thyroid carcinomas (FTCs) and amplification of PKC epsilon in FTCs. Increases in complex karyotypes accompany progression in thyroid lesions. For pituitary tumors, karyotypic abnormalities more often affect functioning than nonfunctioning tumors. Such differences extend into comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), with a similar distribution for chromosomal imbalances. CGH data are reported on all varieties of endocrine tumors, supporting some cytogenetic findings and adding new hotspots for genomic imbalances. Increases in genomic imbalance accompany clinical progression in malignant thyroid tumors, adult adrenocortical tumors, parathyroid tumors, and some pancreatic endocrine tumors (PETs), e.g., insulinomas. Pheochromocytoma and FTC show more losses than gains. Specific patterns of imbalances are emerging for gastrointestinal PETs regarding location and hormone status; for pheochromocytomas, medullary thyroid carcinomas, and parathyroid tumors regarding genetic syndrome association; and for pituitary tumors regarding hormone status.
98	DR	12946481	Hereditary thyroid cancer in childhood occurs in the setting of Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia types 2A and 2B, and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma, FMTC. Prophylactic thyroidectomy in childhood has been recommended in patients found to have inherited mutations in the RET protooncogene, to prevent the development of medullary thyroid carcinoma. In this report are presented the clinical and genetic aspects of hereditary thyroid cancer in children, as well as surgical recommendations and medium-term outcome results.
98	DR	12943614	Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) is a neuroendocrine malignancy that occurs in hereditary (25%) and sporadic (75%) clinical settings. MTC is present in all patients with the multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 syndromes. MTCs produce calcitonin, the measurement of which can indicate the presence of tumors in people who are at risk and the effectiveness of therapy in treated patients. Surgical cure is possible in young patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 who undergo preventative thyroidectomy (approximately 50% of patients who are diagnosed with a palpable thyroid mass) and in some patients with recurrent nodal metastatic disease in the neck. Mortality from MTC is caused by tumor invasion of the trachea, great vessels in the neck, or mediastinum or by the effects of distant metastatic disease. Surgery for cervical recurrence can prevent death from tracheal invasion. The role of radiation therapy is not well defined. There is no effective systemic therapy for MTC. Activating mutations in a tyrosine kinase receptor gene (RET) are present in most MTCs, and experience with tyrosine kinase inhibitors and other agents in clinical trials is critical for the identification of effective systemic treatment.
98	DR	12940128	NA
98	DR	12930027	Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN 2A) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by medullary thyroid carcinoma, pheochromocytoma and primary hyperparathyroidism. The first tumor is usually a medullary thyroid carcinoma. MEN 2A is caused by mutations in the RET proto-oncogene. The detection of mutations in the gene has important diagnostic and therapeutic impacts. Genetic testing of at-risk family members allows one to identify individuals carrying the mutant alleles with very high specificity and sensitivity. Subsequently, total thyroidectomy, recommended at 5 years of age, can be performed in a prophylactic attempt. The authors performed a molecular analysis to identify a mutation in a Thai woman with MEN 2A. She was found to be heterozygous for 1900T>C (C634R). The patient had two daughters who were not found to carry the mutation. The newly available genetic test for patients with MEN 2A in Thailand makes possible accurate DNA-based diagnosis of their at-risk family members before development of the disease, which has important therapeutic impacts for them.
98	PR	12920219	Routine calcitonin (CT) assay programs and genetic testing for RET proto-oncogene mutations have consistently modified the management and understanding of C-cell proliferative disorders. We report a series of 66 consecutive patients with C-cell hyperplasia (CCH) or medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) observed in our institution within an 8-year time period. All the patients had a preoperative basal CT assay and an RET proto-oncogene sequencing. Seventeen patients (F-M ratio: 8:9, mean age: 29.7 y) had a multiple endocrine neoplasia Type 2: 3 children <10 years of age had CCH only, and 14 patients had an MTC, with neoplastic CCH in 10/14 cases. Twenty-seven patients (F-M ratio: 18:9, mean age: 56.6 y) had a sporadic MTC, with physiological CCH in 8 and neoplastic CCH in 3 cases. Twenty-two men (mean age: 46.2 y) had CCH only (physiological CCH in 17 men and neoplastic CCH in 5). We conclude that (1) clinical and pathological characteristics (familial MTC, tumor multifocality, neoplastic CCH) usually associated with hereditary MTC may be misleading and that on the contrary, RET sequencing gives no false positive result; (2) sporadic neoplastic CCH accompanies (and probably precedes) a number of sporadic MTC; and (3) women presenting with a sporadic elevated basal CT have a 100% risk of having an MTC (15/15), but this risk is 3-fold less in men (31%), who will most often have CCH only (69%).
98	PR	12907632	The RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK-MAP kinase pathway mediates the cellular response to extracellular signals that regulate cell proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. Mutation of the RAS proto-oncogene occurs in various thyroid neoplasms such as papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTCs), follicular thyroid adenomas and carcinomas. A second genetic alteration frequently involved in PTC is RET/PTC rearrangements. Recent studies have shown that BRAF, which is a downstream signaling molecule of RET and RAS, is frequently mutated in melanomas. This study tests whether BRAF is also mutated in thyroid tumors and cell lines. We analyzed BRAF gene mutation at codon 599 in thyroid tumors using mutant-allele-specific PCR and in 10 thyroid tumor cell lines by DNA sequencing of the PCR-amplified exon 15. We found that BRAF was mutated in 8 of 10 thyroid tumor cell lines, including 2 of 2 papillary carcinoma cell lines, 4 of 5 anaplastic carcinoma cell lines, 1 of 2 follicular carcinoma cell lines, and 1 follicular adenoma cell line. BRAF mutation at codon 599 was detected in 21 of 56 PTC (38%) but not in 18 follicular adenomas and 6 goiters. BRAF mutation occurred in PTC at a significantly higher frequency in male patients than in female patients. To test whether BRAF mutation may cooperate with RET/PTC rearrangements in the oncogenesis of PTC, we tested whether BRAF-mutated PTCs were also positive for RET/PTC rearrangements. Immunohistochemical staining was conducted to evaluate RET/PTC rearrangements by using two different anti-RET antibodies. Surprisingly, we found that a large number of BRAF-mutated PTCs (8 of 21) also expressed RET, indicating that the RET proto-oncogene is rearranged in these BRAF-mutated PTCs. These observations suggest that mutated BRAF gene may cooperate with RET/PTC to induce the oncogenesis of PTC.
98	DR	12884527	NA
98	DR	12881714	Rearrangement of RET proto-oncogene is the major event in the etiopathogenesis of papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC). We report a high prevalence of BRAF(V599E) mutation in sporadic PTC and in PTC-derived cell lines. The BRAF(V599E) mutation was detected in 23 of 50 PTC (46%) and in three of four PTC-derived cell lines. The prevalence of the BRAF(V599E) mutation in PTC is the highest reported to date in human carcinomas, being only exceeded by melanoma. PTC with RET/PTC rearrangement as well as the TPC-1 cell line (the only one harboring RET/PTC rearrangement) did not show the BRAF(V599E) mutation. BRAF(V599E) mutation was not detected in any of 23 nodular goiters, 51 follicular adenomas and 18 follicular carcinomas. A distinct mutation in BRAF (codon K600E) was detected in a follicular adenoma. Activating mutations in RAS genes were detected in 15% of FA, 33% of FTC and 7% of PTC. BRAF(V599E) mutation did not coexist with alterations in any of the RAS genes in any of the tumors. These results suggest that BRAF(V599E) mutation is frequent in the etiopathogenesis of PTC. The BRAF(V599E) mutation appears to be an alternative event to RET/PTC rearrangement rather than to RAS mutations, which are rare in PTC. BRAF(V599E) may represent an alternative pathway to oncogenic MAPK activation in PTCs without RET/PTC activation.
98	NR	12881713	Differentiated thyroid carcinomas are the most frequent endocrine neoplasms, but account for few cancer-related deaths. Although the indolent growth of these cancers correlates well with longevity, the biological basis for this good prognosis is not known. In contrast, two of the most frequent autoimmune diseases involve the thyroid suggesting a high propensity for this organ to invoke destructive immunity. Unfortunately, the mechanism linking malignancy and autoimmunity is not clear, although the expression of the oncogenic fusion protein RET/PTC3 (RP3) in both of these disorders may provide a clue. Interestingly, the signaling caused by activated RET kinase involves overlapping pathways and some common to the inflammatory response. Accordingly, we analyzed the function of RP3 and a mutant RP3 molecule to induce proinflammatory pathways in thyroid epithelial cells. Indeed, we find that RP3 alone causes increases in nuclear NF-kappaB activity and secretion of MCP-1 and GM-CSF. Finally, transfer of RP3-expressing thyrocytes into mice in vivo attracted dense macrophage infiltrates, which lead to rapid thyroid cell death. Further, cytokine synthesis and inflammation was largely abrogated by mutation of RP3 Tyr588; an important protein-binding site for downstream signaling. Together, these studies implicate oncogene-induced cytokine-signaling pathways in a new mechanism linking inflammation with cancer.
98	PR	12879602	NA
98	DR	12872262	Germline mutations of the RET proto-oncogene have been found in familial and sporadic forms of Hirschsprung disease (HSCR), but also in the autosomal dominantly inherited multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2) syndromes, which comprise the medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) as an obligatory feature. Besides mutations various polymorphisms of the RET proto-oncogene are associated with the HSCR. In this study, we have characterized seven intronic RET polymorphisms (IVS2+9G>A, IVS4+48A>G, IVS12+47C>T, IVS14-24G>A, IVS19+47T>C, IVS20+96C>T, 3'UTR+124A>G) and investigated these variants by DNA sequencing in populations of 76 HSCR patients and 40 sporadic MTC patients as well as in a control population. Variants of four of these seven polymorphisms have a strong association with the HSCR phenotype. In contrast, none of the investigated polymorphisms show a significant difference in the genotype distribution and the allele frequencies in patients with sporadic MTC when compared to controls. These findings support the hypothesis that specific RET haplotypes cause or modify the HSCR phenotype. Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
98	PR	12869284	WAG/Rij rat strain has been suggested as an animal model for the study of inherited human medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), due to its high incidence of spontaneous C-cell thyroid tumours. Although the role of the Ret proto-oncogene mutations, as responsible for human MTC, is well established, nothing has been published concerning this putative animal model. Based upon the previously reported rat Ret sequence, exons 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, and 16, known to carry activating mutations in humans, have been analysed in the WAG/Rij rat by PCR, single strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP) and direct sequencing. Neither the germline nor MTC samples showed any Ret sequence difference in the exons when analysed in comparison to a non-MTC-susceptible rat strain. Our results indicate that Ret exons relevant in humans are not involved in WAG/Rij rat MTC, as expected, and this questions the validity of this strain as a model for the human disease, and suggests there must be additional mechanisms for the genesis and progression of rat MTC.
98	DR	12869215	Gain-of-function mutations in the RET proto-oncogene resulting in a constitutively active receptor tyrosine kinase have been identified as responsible for three subtypes of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN-2) and the development of sporadic medullary and papillary thyroid carcinoma. An important strategy in cancer gene therapy is the inhibition of oncogenic signal transduction by interfering with the molecular mechanisms of activation. In the present study, we tested the therapeutic capacity of an adenovirus expressing a dominant-negative (dn) RET mutant, RET(51).flag, under the control of a synthetic C cell-selective calcitonin promoter (TSE2.CP1) against human medullary thyroid cancer (MTC). Infection of human MTC-derived TT cells with Ad-TSE2.CP1-dn-RET(51).flag resulted in the accumulation of immature RET protein in the endoplasmic reticulum and a strong reduction of oncogenic RET receptor on the cell surface, indicating that RET(51).flag exhibits a dominant-negative effect over endogenous oncogenic protein. Analysis of potential downstream mechanisms associated with the inhibition of oncogenic RET signaling by overexpression of mutant RET(51).flag revealed a significant loss of cell viability in TT cells due to the induction of apoptosis. Finally, we examined the antitumor activity of the dominant-negative RET approach in vivo. Inoculation of Ad-TSE2.CP1- dn-RET(51).flag-expressing MTC cells into nude mice led to complete suppression of tumor growth. Moreover, a single intratumoral injection of Ad-TSE2.CP1-dn-RET(51).flag into established thyroid tumors resulted in prolonged survival of treated mice compared with the controls. Our data suggest that adenoviral delivery of dn-RET(51).flag may be a reliable strategy of effective molecular intervention for RET oncogene-related MTC.
98	PR	12866375	Departments of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, 231 Albert Sabin Way, PO Box 670529, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0529, USA.
98	DR	12864791	OBJECTIVE: Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN 2A) and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC) are genetic diseases due to activating mutations of the RET proto-oncogene. Affected patients develop medullary thyroid carcinoma (100%), in an isolated form (FMTC) or in association with phaeochromocytoma (30-50%), and primary hyperparathyroidism (10-20%) (MEN 2A). The presence of cutaneous lichen amyloidosis (CLA) has been anecdotally described in few families harbouring RET proto-oncogene mutation in codon 634. The aim of the study was to evaluate the incidence of CLA in MEN 2A/FMTC families. PATIENTS AND DESIGN: Ten MEN 2A/FMTC families were studied and RET gene mutations identified in all. Complete dermatological assessment was carried out in each family member. Skin biopsy for histological studies was performed in patients with CLA. RESULTS: Among 10 MEN 2A/FMTC families, the presence of CLA was found only in patients belonging to the three families with MEN 2A and RET mutation in codon 634. Nine of 25 patients (36%) with codon 634 mutation presented CLA, though two of them did not show CLA skin lesions but the typical neurological pruritus in the upper back. In all patients, neurological pruritus was present since infancy as a precocious marker of the disorder. The dermatological study of patients with CLA skin lesions added further evidence that pruritus has a pivotal role in the development of CLA, the amyloid deposition being the consequence of repeated scratching. Light microscopy revealed orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, with elongation of the rete ridges, rare intramalpighian apoptic keratinocytes and deposits of amorphous material in the superficial dermis. Examination under ultraviolet light showed thioflavin T-positive staining, confirming the presence of amyloid in the papillary dermis. The use of Capsaicin at the dilution of 0.025% had a mild efficacy on the cutaneous symptoms. CONCLUSIONS: Among the members of the three families with MEN 2A and RET 634 mutation, the incidence of CLA was 36%, a figure similar to that reported in the literature for phaeochromocytoma (30-50%) and even higher than that for hyperparathyroidism (10-20%). The present data confirm that CLA is linked to codon 634 RET mutations and is a precocious marker of the disorder.
98	NR	12858002	Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) occurs as both a sporadic and an inherited disease. MTC is a consistent feature of multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) 2A, MEN 2B, and familial non-MEN MTC (FMTC). Plasma calcitonin is a sensitive and specific marker for the presence of MTC. Genetic testing can identify mutant gene carriers, and prophylactic total thyroidectomy should be carried out in patients with the mutant gene. The outcome of MTC is progressively worse in FMTC, MEN 2A, sporadic MTC, and MEN 2B, and MEN 2B has been found to have the worst prognosis. There is a significant genotype-phenotype correlation, which allows a more sensitive individualized approach to the timing and extent of prophylactic thyroidectomy.
98	DR	12850460	BACKGROUND: In medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), mutations in the RET protooncogene lead to oncogenic transformation. RET activation in other cell types has been shown to cause phosphorylation of the focal adhesion-associated proteins focal adhesion kinase (FAK), paxillin, and p130(CAS). We hypothesized that adhesion-dependent signaling might be deranged in MTC cells. METHODS: Indirect immunofluorescence was used to label beta(1) integrin, FAK, paxillin, and p130CAS. Rhodamine-labeled phalloidin was used to visualize actin microfilaments. Phosphorylated protein was detected by immunoprecipitation followed by Western blotting for phosphotyrosine. MTC cell invasiveness was quantified using a modified Boyden chamber assay. RESULTS: Clustering of beta(1) integrin, FAK, paxillin, and p130(CAS) into focal adhesions were not detected in MTC cells under any conditions, although clustering was seen as expected in control HeLa cells. Despite this failure, FAK, paxillin and p130(CAS) were all found to be phosphorylated. Actin microfilaments were generally not seen although in a few cells, small, poorly formed microfilaments could be detected. MTC cells invaded poorly as compared with highly invasive cell lines. However a clear difference was noted between invasiveness on growth factor depleted Matrigel and regular Matrigel. CONCLUSIONS: In MTC cells, focal adhesions are not seen in response to interaction with extracellular matrix. Consistent with this failure, actin microfilaments are absent or poorly formed and invasion is weak. Despite the absence of focal adhesions, focal adhesion proteins remain phosphorylated, even though in normal cells their signaling activity is dependent on focal adhesion formation. Deranged adhesion-dependent signaling may contribute to MTC pathogenesis.
98	DR	12841548	NA
98	DR	12811413	Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), a neoplasm of thyroid C-cells, is characterized by dominant activating mutations in the RET proto-oncogene. Currently therapy is restricted to surgical removal of all neoplastic tissue lacking alternative forms of treatment such as chemotherapy or radiotherapy. Therefore MTC is a particularly attractive target for gene therapeutic approaches. Many promising gene therapy strategies have been used in various animal models of MTC, showing enhanced antitumoral efficacy, and these will hopefully extend our current standard of care in the future. These approaches can tentatively be subdivided into four groups: (a) Inhibition of oncogenic RET signaling, (b) suicide gene therapy, (c) immunotherapy, and (d) combination of immunotherapy and suicide approaches. To block oncogenic signal transduction dominant-negative RET mutants were delivered into tumor cells and found to possess strong antineoplastic activity, including tumor growth suppression and increased animal survival. Suicide gene therapeutic approaches applied to MTC treatment featured either gene transfer of herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase with concomitant application of ganciclovir or delivery of nitric oxide synthase II. Here antitumor effects were attributed to the occurrence of substantial bystander activities. Immunotherapy approaches comprised stimulation of immune response by delivery of interleukin 2 or 12. Finally, treatment with herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase/ganciclovir in combination with interleukin 2 was found to be superior over either treatment alone. This review discusses the various gene therapeutic approaches applied to MTC treatment in detail, gives an overview on the diverse vector systems used to achieve efficient transduction of thyroid cancer cells, and points out the strategies employed to accomplish target cell selective gene expression thereby contributing to enhanced safety of gene therapy for MTC
98	DR	12788868	Since the establishment of a protocol for molecular analysis of hereditary medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) in southern Brazil, in 1997, 17 independent families with RET germline mutation have been identified. Because neither molecular diagnosis nor the pentagastrin test were available before the establishment of this protocol, we had the opportunity to observe a large number of patients in whom the disease has evolved naturally without medical intervention, namely prophylactic thyroidectomy. We observed a wide spectrum in terms of clinical presentation and natural course of the disease even among genetically related individuals. Sixty-nine individuals from 12 different families presented a codon 634 mutation, the most prevailing missense mutation in our series. The specific mutations identified were C634Y (n = 49), C634R (n = 13), and C634W (n = 7). Individuals with the C634R mutation presented significantly more distant metastases at diagnosis than subjects with the C634Y or C634W mutations (54.5% vs. 19.4% vs. 14.3%, respectively, P = 0.03). Further analysis of the estimated cumulative frequency of lymph node and/or distant metastases by Kaplan-Meier curves showed that the appearance of lymph nodes and metastases occurred later in patients with C634Y than in those with C634R (P = 0.001). Our results suggest that specific nucleotide and amino acid exchanges at codon 634 might have a direct impact on tumor aggressiveness in MEN 2A syndrome.
98	DR	12787916	Molecular analysis of cDNA derived from a papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) (follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma on histology) which developed in an externally irradiated patient 4 years after exposure identified a portion of the 5' region, exons 1-3, of the rfp gene juxtaposed upstream of the fragment encoding the tyrosine kinase (TK) domain of the ret gene. The fusion gene, termed Delta rfp/ret, was the result of a balanced chromosomal translocation t(6;10) (p21.3;q11.2) confirmed by interphase FISH painting, with breakpoints occurring in introns 3 and 11 of the rfp and ret genes, respectively. Both Delta rfp/ret and reciprocal ret/rfp chimeric introns had small deletions around breakpoints consistent with presumed misrepair of a radiation-induced double-strand DNA break underlying the rearrangement. No extensive sequence homology was found between the fragments flanking the breakpoints. The fusion protein retained the propensity to form oligomers likely to be mediated by a coiled-coil of the RFP polypeptide as assessed by a yeast two-hybrid system. NIH 3T3 fibroblasts stably transfected with a mammalian expression vector encoding full-length Delta RFP/RET readily gave rise to the tumors in athymic mice suggestive of high transforming potential of the fusion protein. Thus, the Delta rfp/ret rearrangement may be involved in a causative manner in cancerogenesis and provides additional evidence of the role of activated ret oncogene in the development of a subset of papillary thyroid carcinoma.
98	DR	12755957	Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) is a malignancy of the parafollicular C cells of the thyroid gland. It occurs sporadically or as part of the multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) syndromes. Patients who have inherited a mutation in the RET proto-oncogene should have thyroidectomy early in life to prevent formation and spread of this cancer. Most patients with sporadic disease present with a palpable neck mass. The diagnosis is made by fine needle aspiration biopsy and by measuring calcitonin levels in the blood. Primary treatment consists of surgical resection including a total thyroidectomy, central neck nodal dissection and functional lateral neck nodal dissections. Most patients with a palpable primary tumour have nodal disease present at the time of operation, and nodal involvement is often bilateral. Adequate resection of the primary tumour and cervical lymph nodes is important to optimize outcome and minimize the risk of recurrent disease. Proper handling of the parathyroid glands prevents hypoparathyroidism. Following primary surgical resection, more than half of the patients will have recurrent disease with persistent elevation of calcitonin levels. Currently, there is no adequate systemic therapy for treating recurrent disease. Surgical reoperation or conservative observation are the best available options. Diagnostic laparoscopy for liver evaluation is the most sensitive diagnostic test to detect the presence of distant metastases.
98	DR	12746565	Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN 2A) and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC) are characterized by development of medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) and caused by germline RET mutations. Patients with MEN 2A also develop pheochromocytoma and/or hyperparathyroidism (HPT). However, MEN 2A-affected individuals could display the FMTC phenotype at first clinical manifestation. To establish the correct phenotype and improve clinical management of patients affected by hereditary MTC, clinical screening, RET mutational analysis, penetrance of MTC, and genotype-phenotype correlation were performed in a large, suspected FMTC kindred of 86 individuals. Germline C634Y RET mutation was confirmed in 22 individuals, 15 of whom were thyroidectomized when high serum calcitonin levels were detected. MTC was confirmed in 12 individuals and C-cell hyperplasia in 3. HPT was detected in two patients. High penetrance of MTC at young age (79% at 30 yr of age) was found. This family was considered to be affected by FMTC for several years because MTC was the sole clinical manifestation. However, our results allowed reclassifying the family as MEN 2A, thereby improving clinical management of family members. Our findings regarding penetrance and genotype-phenotype correlation suggest that patients considered to have FMTC may in fact have MEN 2A in some kindreds.
98	DR	12734540	Germline mutations in the RET proto-oncogene are responsible for the development of human hereditary diseases, including multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 2A and 2B, familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC), and Hirschsprung's disease (HSCR). It has been reported that some families developed both MEN 2A/FMTC and HSCR, in which a mutation in a cysteine residue at codon 609, 618, or 620 in the RET gene was present. Here we report a novel RET mutation detected in a Japanese family with medullary thyroid carcinoma and HSCR. A germline mutation in cysteine 611 of the RET gene was identified in this family, which introduced an amino-acid change from cysteine to serine. By biological and biochemical analyses of mutant RET proteins, we previously predicted the potentiality that amino-acid substitution for cysteine 611 as well as cysteines 609, 618, and 620 would promote the development of MEN 2A/FMTC and HSCR. This clinical case substantiates our suggestion for the mechanism of the development of both the diseases.
98	DR	12721726	The diagnosis and treatment of multiple endocrine neoplasias type 2A (MEN 2A) requires interdisciplinary management. The association of RET proto-oncogene mutations and medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) in children is well-known, but the optimal timing for elective surgery is controversial. Besides the risk of MTC, associated anomalies like hyperparathyroidism have to be considered. We report the results of molecular genetic investigations, the pentagastrin stimulation test, pre- and postoperative staging, and histologic examinations of four children who had a positive family history for MEN 2A. Histologic specimens of the removed thyroid glands showed MTC in all four cases. The patients had an uneventful postoperative clinical course. In view of the recent literature and our patients' results, we suggest a concept for diagnostic strategy and timing of the elective thyroidectomy.
98	DR	12711285	AIMS: Germline mutated RET proto-oncogene, causing multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN)-2a syndrome is the indication for prophylactic total thyroidectomy. Literature regarding the risk and the extent of early surgical intervention is scarce and the optimum age for surgery is still controversial. To optimize management in these young children we evaluate our experience and results. PATIENTS AND METHODS: From 1990 to 2001 preventive total thyroidectomy was performed in 13 MEN-2a gene carriers (4 boys and 9 girls; median age 7 (4-14) years). Preoperative assessment, surgical procedure, pathological examination, postoperative complications and treatment results were studied. RESULTS:Surgery existed of a total thyroidectomy alone (n=3) in children with normal basal calcitonin and in combination with tracheo-esophageal exploration (n=6) or central compartment dissection (n=4) in case of abnormal calcitonin levels. Eight children presented with medullary thyroid cancer (MTC), three (median: 5 (4-12) years) with microscopic MTC and five (median 6 (4-14) years) with frank invasive MTC. Four of these five patients were younger than 6 years. Except for long-lasting hypoparathyroidism in one patient there were no complications. At a median follow-up of 6.5 years all patients are disease free. CONCLUSION: MTC in RET mutated MEN-2a gene carriers in childhood are found at the age of 4 years. Therefore, DNA testing should be done preferably before that age. Preventive surgery can be performed safely at that age and may be limited to total thyroidectomy when baseline calcitonin levels are normal.
98	PR	12707638	NA
98	DR	12702567	Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN 2A) is associated with specific germ-line missense mutations in the RET proto-oncogene. Only a minor fraction of human disorders are simple monogenic diseases, and the identification of polymorphisms that increase susceptibility, including variations in pathological phenotypes, to human diseases is one of the key problems in medical genetics. To explore this idea, we analyzed the polymorphisms G691S (exon 11) and S904S (TCC-TCG, exon 15) of RET in 198 individuals corresponding to 35 unrelated Spanish MEN 2A families (104 patients with oncogenic MEN 2A mutation and 94 healthy relatives). We found strong cosegregation between both polymorphisms (100% Fisher's exact test, P < 0.001) using a control population containing 653 healthy individuals (362 females and 291 males). Interestingly, we found that the homozygous for these polymorphisms were, on average, 10 years younger at diagnosis compared with heterozygous and wild-type homozygous (P = 0.037). Taken together, all these findings could indicate that the G691S and S904S variants of RET have a modifier effect on the age at onset of MEN 2A. Moreover, compared with the control population, the homozygote status was significantly more prevalent in a series of 110 sporadic thyroid carcinoma (odds ratio = 2.36), suggesting that these polymorphisms may play a role as a low penetrance risk factor.
98	DR	12694233	In multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN 2A) and familial medullary thyroid cancer (FMTC), the majority of germline mutations are restricted to specific positions in exons 10 and 11 of the RET gene. However, germline mutations may very occasionally occur in other exons, including exon 14 of the RET gene. Interestingly, an increased frequency of a rare germline sequence variant of the RET exon 14, S836S, has been detected in patients with sporadic medullary thyroid cancer (MTC), and this variant has been proposed to play a role in the genesis of MTC and, perhaps, FMTC. In this study we report the segregation of a germline V804L mutation and a germline sequence variant S836S in exon 14 of the RET gene in an extended Hungarian FMTC kindred comprising 80 individuals of four generations. Molecular analysis of the RET gene was performed by direct DNA sequencing in 23 family members, of whom 12 had the V804L mutation, three had the V804L mutation and S836S polymorphism in separate alleles, and six had the S836S polymorphism, all in heterozygous forms. Two of the family members had neither mutation nor polymorphism of the RET gene. Three of the family members who had the V804L mutation and one member who could not be tested for mutation were operated for non-metastatic MTC, while one member with MTC who had the V804L mutation refused surgery. In all patients affected with MTC, the disease developed relatively late in life and never caused death. None of the other family members carrying the V804L mutation and/or the S836S polymorphism had clinical or biochemical evidence of MTC. These observations suggest that the co-existence of the V804L mutation and S836S polymorphism in separate alleles does not seem to aggravate the relatively low-risk disease phenotype characteristic in most patients with codon 804 mutations of the RET exon 14. Copyright Blackwell Munksgaard, 2003
98	DR	12690476	BACKGROUND: Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 2, a cancer syndrome inherited in the dominant fashion, is defined by the occurrence of medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), either as a singular lesion (familial medullary thyroid carcinoma, FMTC) or with the variable expression of pheochromocytoma, hyperparathyroidism (MEN 2A), ganglioneuromas, buccal neuromas and Marfanoid-like phenotype (MEN 2B). DISCUSSION: Germline mutations of the RET proto-oncogene, localized on chromosome 10q11.2, have been identified as the underlying genetic cause of the disorder. In the majority of patients with MEN 2A/FMTC missense mutations at exon 10 or exon 11 are identifiable. Cysteine to arginine exchange at codon 634 is the mutation most frequently found. In MEN 2B approximately 95% of patients present with a mutation at codon 918 (exon 16). Additionally, less frequent mutations in other codons have been found in both syndromes. The DNA-based genotype analysis enables the identification of gene carriers at risk of developing MTC and offer them prophylactic thyroidectomy prior to development of any thyroid pathologies. Prophylactic surgery is generally recommended for MEN 2A/FMTC gene carriers at the age of 4-6 years. Due to the aggressiveness of the MEN 2B syndrome gene carriers should be operated by the age of 1 year. Presumably some less virulent mutations allow postponement of the prophylactic treatment to the second to fourth decade of life. CONCLUSIONS: Compared to standard presymptomatic biochemical screening, genetic testing and consecutive prophylactic treatment contribute to better outcome of individuals at risk for MTC.
98	DR	12690093	Chromosomal rearrangements linking the promoter(s) and N-terminal domain of unrelated gene(s) to the C terminus of RET result in constitutively activated chimeric forms of the receptor in thyroid cells (RET/PTC). RET/PTC rearrangements are thought to be tumor-initiating events; however, the early biological consequences of RET/PTC activation are unknown. To explore this, we generated clonal lines derived from well-differentiated rat thyroid PCCL3 cells with doxycycline-inducible expression of either RET/PTC1 or RET/PTC3. As previously shown in other cell types, RET/PTC1 and RET/PTC3 oligomerized and displayed constitutive tyrosine kinase activity. Neither RET/PTC1 nor RET/PTC3 conferred cells with the ability to grow in the absence of TSH, likely because of concomitant stimulation of both DNA synthesis and apoptosis, resulting in no net growth in the cell population. Effects of RET/PTC on DNA synthesis and apoptosis did not require direct interaction of the oncoprotein with either Shc or phospholipase Cgamma. Acute expression of the oncoprotein decreased TSH-mediated growth stimulation due to interference of TSH signaling by RET/PTC at multiple levels. Taken together, these data indicate that RET/PTC is a weak tumor-initiating event and that TSH action is disrupted by this oncoprotein at several points, and also predict that secondary genetic or epigenetic changes are required for clonal expansion.
98	DR	12686527	HYPOTHESIS: Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) is caused by RET proto-oncogene mutations and has a strong penetrance for medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC). Subtypes are defined by the presence or absence of pheochromocytomas, hyperparathyroidism, and characteristic clinical stigmas. We hypothesize that specific RET mutations correlate with the MEN 2 phenotype and aggressiveness of MTC. DESIGN: Review of endocrine surgery database from 1951 through 2002. SETTING: Tertiary referral center. PATIENTS: Eighty-six patients from 47 kindreds were identified with MEN 2A, MEN 2B, or familial MTC. Patients were classified into 3 RET mutation risk groups: level 1, low risk for MTC (codons 609, 768, 790, 791, 804, and 891); level 2, intermediate risk (codons 611, 618, 620, and 634); and level 3, highest risk (codons 883 and 918). MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Stage of MTC at diagnosis and at last follow-up and frequency of pheochromocytomas and hyperparathyroidism. RESULTS: RET analysis was complete for 71 patients from 39 kindreds. Multivariate analysis identified an increased likelihood of stage III or IV MTC at diagnosis with increasing age (odds ratio, 1.12 per year of age at thyroidectomy; 95% confidence interval, 1.07-1.17; P<.001) and increasing risk group (odds ratio, 14.23 per incremental increase in MTC risk group from 1 to 3; 95% confidence interval, 3.05-66.55; P<.001). Pheochromocytomas were found in 21 patients from 12 kindreds; 20 of 21 patients had codon 634 or 918 mutations. Hyperparathyroidism was found in 10 patients from 7 kindreds; 7 of 10 patients had codon 634 mutations. CONCLUSION: Specific RET mutations predict the phenotypic expression of disease and the MTC aggressiveness in patients with MEN 2, guiding the timing of thyroidectomy and screening for pheochromocytoma.
98	DR	12679489	Inappropriate activation of the RET receptor tyrosine kinase causes development of papillary and medullary thyroid cancer. We have previously shown that pyrazolopyrimidine is a potent inhibitor of the RET kinase. Here, we show that 4-amino-5-(4-chloro-phenyl)-7-(t-butyl)pyrazolo[3,4-d]pyrimidine) (PP2), another pyrazolopyrimidine, blocks the enzymatic activity of the isolated RET kinase and RET/PTC1 oncoprotein at IC(50) in the nanomolar range. PP2 blocked in vivo phosphorylation and signaling of the RET/PTC1 oncoprotein. PP2 prevented serum-independent growth of RET/PTC1-transformed NIH3T3 fibroblasts and of TPC1 and FB2, two human papillary thyroid carcinoma cell lines that carry spontaneous RET/PTC1 rearrangements. Finally, PP2 blocked invasion of type I collagen matrix by TPC1 cells. Thus, pyrazolopirimidines hold promise for the treatment of human cancers sustaining oncogenic activation of RET.
98	DR	12679485	Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) is a malignant tumor of the calcitonin-secreting parafollicular C cells of the thyroid occurring sporadically and as a component of the multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2/familial medullary thyroid carcinoma syndrome. The primary genetic cause of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 is germline mutation of the RET protooncogene. Somatic point mutations in RET also occur in sporadic MTC. Although RET mutation is likely sufficient to cause C-cell hyperplasia, the precursor lesion to MTC, tumor progression is thought to be due to clonal expansion caused by the accumulation of somatic events. Using the genome-scanning technique comparative genomic hybridization, we identified chromosomal imbalances that occur in MTC including deletions of chromosomes 1p, 3q26.3-q27, 4, 9q13-q22, 13q, and 22q and amplifications of chromosome 19. These regions house known tumor suppressor genes as well as genes encoding subunits of the multicomponent complex of glycosylphosphatidylinositol-linked proteins (glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor family receptors alpha-2-4) and their ligands glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor, neurturin, persephin, and artemin that facilitate RET dimerization and downstream signaling. Chromosomal imbalances in the MTC cell line TT were largely identical to those identified in primary MTC tumors, consolidating its use as a model for studying MTC.
98	NR	12674901	The origin, characteristics, and lifetime risk for the following five types of hereditary cancer (HCS) syndromes are briefly described in this review: hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) syndrome, familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), and hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) syndrome, hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) syndrome, and medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC). Most are caused by mutations in tumor suppressor genes. In HCS, a single copy of the mutated tumor suppressor gene is inherited, and mutation of the second wild type allele of the gene is required for tumorigenesis. Patients with HCS have a higher than normal risk of a second malignancy. Management strategies to address increased cancer risk in HCS include genetic counseling and testing, targeted surveillance, chemoprevention, and prophylactic surgery. Genetic testing for high-risk family members is strongly recommended. Available data indicate surgical prophylaxis is more successful than surveillance in reducing cancer risk in carriers of BRCA, CDH1, APC, and RET mutation.
98	DR	12673960	NA
98	DR	12670889	Thyroid papillary cancers (PTCs) are associated with activating mutations of genes coding for RET or TRK tyrosine kinase receptors, as well as of RAS genes. Activating mutations of BRAF were reported recently in most melanomas and a small proportion of colorectal tumors. Here we show that a somatic mutation of BRAF, V599E, is the most common genetic change in PTCs (28 of 78; 35.8%). BRAF(V599E) mutations were unique to PTCs, and not found in any of the other types of differentiated follicular neoplasms arising from the same cell type (0 of 46). Moreover, there was no overlap between PTC with RET/PTC, BRAF, or RAS mutations, which altogether were present in 66% of cases. The lack of concordance for these mutations was highly unlikely to be a chance occurrence. Because these signaling proteins function along the same pathway in thyroid cells, this represents a unique paradigm of human tumorigenesis through mutation of three signaling effectors lying in tandem.
98	DR	12665650	The relationship between chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis (CLT) and papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) is a subject of controversy. Some investigators suggest a causal relationship, whereas others regard the two as only a coincidental occurrence. An additional complicating factor is the presence of atypical nuclei frequently found within lymphoid infiltrates in CLT, which resemble those in PTC. The finding of the RET-PTC translocations in CLT has been reported by two independent groups of investigators, suggesting that the areas of nuclear atypia in CLT are neoplastic rather than reactive. In the present study, we report additional molecular findings that support the hypothesis that the atypical nuclear changes in CLT may be preneoplastic or neoplastic. We microdissected small areas with atypical nuclei in glands with CLT and observed loss-of-heterozygosity mutations of tumor suppressor genes. These genetic mutations are evidence of clonal preneoplastic or neoplastic changes in the follicular cells of CLT. The clinical malignant potential of these minute foci is likely to be very small but remains to be determined.
98	DR	12665647	Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) is diagnosed in both cytology and surgical pathology specimens on the basis of distinct nuclear morphology, characterized by nuclear elongation, chromatin clearing, intranuclear grooves, and inclusions. Although these nuclear features are specific to papillary carcinoma, they can be mimicked in some benign conditions. The majority of PTC cases do not pose diagnostic problems. However, a distinct subset of cases has generated controversy among experts. These cases are follicular patterned tumors that show minimal nuclear changes in PTC. Several investigators have explored the role of immunohistochemical markers in the histologic diagnosis of PTC. Somatic rearrangements of the RET protooncogene are the most frequent genetic abnormality found in PTC. The frequency of these rearrangements has varied according to the geographic region, radiation exposure, and methodologies used and histologic variant of PTC. Recent studies have suggested that RET/PTC may be the cause of this specific nuclear change in PTC; however, the role of RET/PTC in tumor progression still needs to be defined.
98	DR	12665646	Tumors of thyroid follicular cells provide a very interesting model to understand the development of human cancer. It is becoming apparent that distinct molecular events are associated with specific stages in a multistep tumorigenic process with good genotype/ phenotype correlation. For instance, mutations of the gsp and thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor genes are associated with benign hyperfunctioning thyroid nodules and adenomas while alterations of other specific genes, such as oncogenic tyrosine kinase alterations (RET/PTC, TRK) in papillary carcinoma and the newly discovered PAX8/peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma rearrangement, are distinctive features of cancer. Although activating RAS mutations occur at all stages of thyroid tumorigenesis, evidence is accumulating that they may also play an important role in tumor progression, a role that is well documented for p53. Environmental factors (iodine deficiency, ionizing radiations) have been shown to play a crucial role in promoting the development of thyroid cancer, influencing both its genotypic and phenotypic features. It is possible that the follicular thyroid cell has unique ways to respond to DNA damage. Similarly to leukemia or sarcomas (and unlike most epithelial cancers), numerous specific rearrangements are being discovered in thyroid cancer suggesting preferential activation of DNA repair instead of cell death programs after environmentally induced genetic alterations.
98	DR	12659362	A 7-year-old girl presented with a thyroid mass, elevated serum levels of calcitonin and carcinoembryonic antigen, as well as multiple mucosal nodules in the upper lip and tongue. Cytologic material obtained by fine-needle aspiration biopsy from the thyroid mass was diagnosed as medullary carcinoma and confirmed by immunohistochemical studies in the cell-block sections. Subsequent histopathologic examination showed involvement of both thyroid lobes by medullary carcinoma, and electron microscopic studies further confirmed the diagnosis. Molecular studies showed a point mutation in amino acid 918 in exon 16 of the RET proto-oncogene. Biopsies from the upper lip and tongue showed mucosal neuromas. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy is frequently used in the initial evaluation of thyroid nodules. This case illustrates the value of fine-needle aspiration biopsy as a safe and accurate diagnostic modality in the workup of pediatric thyroid nodules. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy should always be considered for the investigation of thyroid nodules in pediatric patients.
98	DR	12652644	RET and NTRK1 are receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) proteins which play a role in the development and maturation of specific component of the nervous system. Their alterations have been associated to several human diseases, including some forms of cancer and developmental abnormalities. These features have contributed to the concept that one gene can be responsible for more than one disease. Moreover, both genes encoding for the two RTKs show genetic alterations that belong to either "gain of function" or "loss of function" class of mutations. In fact, receptor rearrangements or point mutations convert RET and NTRK1 in dominantly acting transforming genes leading to thyroid tumors, whereas inactivating mutations, associated with Hirschsprung's disease (HSCR) and congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis (CIPA), impair RET and NTRK1 functions, respectively. In this review we have summarized the main features of the two receptors, their physiological and pathological roles. In addition, we attempted to identify the correlations between the different genetic alterations and the related pathogenetic mechanisms. Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
98	DR	12606135	We report what we believe to be the first case of a patient with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN 2A) and renal dysplasia associated with an RET 634 mutation. The proband presented at the age of 29 with medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), bilateral pheochromocytomas, and primary hyperparathyroidism. Screening of family members identified the syndrome in his father. Both the proband and his father carry RET 634 germline mutation resulting in cysteine to arginine amino acid substitution. The proband had a left nephrectomy at the age of 10 years. Histologic examination of the resected kidney revealed severe dysplasia. His father had normal renal tract on ultrasonography. The proband's clinical presentation was unusual, and initially thought to be an atypical pneumonia. Surgical management after pharmacologic alpha- and beta-blockage consisted of bilateral adrenalectomy, total thyroidectomy, and subtotal parathyroidectomy as a single procedure.
98	DR	12604374	BACKGROUND: Different RET oncogene mutations have been found to be associated with inherited medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) in the context of three different syndromes including multiple endocrine neoplasia types 2A (MEN 2A) and 2B (MEN 2B) and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC). These mutations have been recorded in different populations, but to date there is no corresponding study in Mexican families. Our purpose was identification of RET mutations in Mexican families with inherited or sporadic MTC (SMTC) and search for RET protein expression as prognostic marker in MTC tumors. METHODS: Nine unrelated families with MTC corresponding either to two MEN 2A, three MEN 2B, or four SMTC were studied. Screening of exons 10, 11, and 13-16 of RET oncogene in DNA from circulating lymphocytes and tumor samples were analyzed. Immuno- staining for RET was performed in the corresponding tumor. RESULTS: Germline 918 ATG-->ACG RET mutation was present in three unrelated MEN 2B individuals and corresponding somatic mutation in one individual with SMTC; 634 TGC-->TTC RET mutation was detected in two related patients in an MEN 2A family and the 634 TGC-->TAC RET mutation was detected in 12 related individuals from a second MEN 2A family. RET protein expression was detected in all MTC tumors showing different staining intensity. CONCLUSIONS: RET mutations found in Mexican patients with MTC are similar to those previously reported in several MTC families worldwide. This indicates that RET mutations are highly conserved and that MTC etiology does not depend to a great extent on environmental factors or ethnic differences. Detection of RET protein in MTC tissue sections is not useful as prognostic marker.
98	NR	12574209	Cancer/testis antigens (CTA) are tumor-associated antigens expressed during ontogenesis, in a number of solid tumors but not in normal tissues except testis. Most of these CTA are highly immunogenic, eliciting a humoral and cellular response in the patients with advanced cancer, and are useful for tumor-specific immunotherapy. Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) is a neoplasm derived from the parafollicular cells of the thyroid and occurs in either a sporadic or a familial form. In the present study, we examined by RT-PCR the expression of a number of genes encoding CTA in 23 surgical samples of sporadic MTC. Among the 11 cDNA antigens examined, RAGE, MAGE-4, and GAGE 1-2, were not expressed in any of the tissues. SSX 2 was present only in one tissue, whereas BAGE, GAGE 1-6, MAGE-1, MAGE-2, MAGE-3, and SSX 1-5 were detected in two to five samples. NY-ESO-1 cDNA was the most frequent, being detected in 15 of 23 examined samples (65.2%). Six (26.1%) tissues did not express any CTA-specific mRNA, whereas 10 tumors expressed only one gene (43.5%), 3 (21.4%) expressed 2 genes, and 4 displayed a broad CTA gene expression. NY-ESO-1 expression in primary MTC tissues significantly correlated with tumor recurrence. The presence of specific anti-NY-ESO-1 antibodies was searched in the sera of MTC-affected patients examined by ELISA using recombinant NY-ESO-1 protein. A humoral response against this CTA was detected in 6 of 11 NY-ESO-1 expressing patients (54.5%), and in 1 of 6 patients with NY-ESO-1-negative tumor. No anti-NY-ESO-1 antibodies were detected in healthy subjects (n = 17). The presence of anti-NY-ESO-1 antibodies was searched also in the sera of MTC affected patients whose tissues were not available for CTA analysis. Anti-NY-ESO-1 antibodies were present in 15 of 42 sera (35.7%), demonstrating that MTC is a neoplasm frequently associated with humoral immune response to NY-ESO-1. Serological survey may be useful as a way to identify patients with humoral immune response to NY-ESO-1 that provide a new attractive target for vaccine-based immunotherapy of MTC.
98	PR	12548176	NA
98	DR	12548161	The clinical significance of microscopic papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTCa) is controversial. Many authors think that microscopic PTCa (<1 cm) have the same pathogenetic origin as clinically sized papillary carcinomas (>1 cm). Despite the fact that all clinical risk prognostication schemes have the size of the tumor as a primary category, small tumors do have malignant potential and can metastasize. There is growing evidence that small PTCa have the molecular translocations between the proto-oncogene RET and various activating partner genes that are characteristic of clinically sized PTCa. This study used a microdissection and genotyping assay to study the patterns of loss of heterozygosity of tumor suppressor genes in microscopic and clinically sized PTCa. Our results indicate that all PTCa harbor mutations with similar frequencies and distribution patterns, regardless of the size of the tumor. These data are further evidence that microscopic and clinically sized PTCa are pathogenetically related.
98	DR	12534735	BACKGROUND: The incidence of papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) has increased in Australia at a rate exceeding 10% per annum over the past two decades. In Tasmania the increase has averaged 24% per year between 1982 and 1997. Exposure to ionizing radiation is the best characterized risk factor for PTC. Oncogenic mutations of the RET proto-oncogene (ret/PTC rearrangements) have been associated with PTC arising following radiation exposure. In the present study it was sought to determine if PTC incidence trends were associated with an increased occurrence of the ret/PTC1 rearrangement. METHODS: All cases of PTC diagnosed in Tasmania during the even numbered years 1978-1998 inclusive were sought for study (n = 98). Archival histopathology blocks for 62 cases were located. The RNA was successfully extracted from 41 tumours and ret/PTC1 status assessed by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. RESULTS: The ret/PTC1 mutation was found in 26 (63%) of PTC. The mean age at diagnosis for ret/PTC1-positive and ret/PTC1-negative tumours was 46.5 +/- 15.46 and 41.9 +/- 13.45 years, respectively. The ret/PTC1 positivity was significantly associated with larger tumour size. However, ret/PTC1 was not associated with an adverse prognosis. The prevalence of tumours positive for ret/PTC1 remained stable over the study period (1978-1998) and did not exhibit birth year or diagnosis year clustering. CONCLUSION: This is the first study to map temporal trends for the prevalence of ret/PTC1 relative to incidence trends for PTC. Although the ret/PTC1 mutation was frequently identified in Tasmanian PTC, there was no clear relationship between ret/PTC1 and recent PTC incidence trends.
98	DR	12527893	RET gene rearrangements, which generate chimeric RET/PTC oncogenes, are early events in the evolution of thyroid papillary carcinomas. Expression of RET/PTC oncogenes promotes neoplastic transformation of cultured thyroid cells and of thyroid glands in transgenic mice. Notwithstanding these oncogenic effects, we have found that the expression of two RET/PTC oncogenes (H4-RET and RFG-RET) induces apoptosis of rat thyroid PC CL 3 cells. Promotion of thyroid cell death depends on the kinase activity of RET/PTC and on the phosphorylation of a tyrosine residue (tyrosine 1062) that maps in the carboxy-terminus of the RET protein. Tyrosine 1062 is essential for RET/PTC-mediated activation of the Ras/ERK pathway. Inhibition of Ras/ERK by a dominant negative Ras or by the MEKI inhibitor, PD98059, obstructed RET/PTC-mediated apoptosis. We also show that signals transmitted by tyrosine 1062 mediate proapoptotic events like Bcl-2 down regulation and Bax upregulation, and that adoptive overexpression of Bcl-2 overcomes RET/PTC-induced apoptosis. Thus, gene rearrangements that generate RET/PTC oncogenes subvert RET function by converting it into a chronically active kinase that is constitutively phosphorylated on tyrosine 1062. In turn, Y1062 phosphorylation transmits not only mitogenic but also proapoptotic signals to thyroid cells.
98	DR	12519890	We have previously identified two second hit mechanisms involved in the development of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2)-associated tumors: trisomy 10 with duplication of the mutant RET allele and loss of the wild-type RET allele. However, some of the MEN 2-associated tumors investigated did not demonstrate either mechanism. Here, we studied the TT cell line derived from MEN 2-associated medullary thyroid carcinoma with a RET germline mutation in codon 634, for alternative mechanisms of tumorigenesis. Although we observed a 2:1 ratio between mutant and wild-type RET at the genomic DNA level in this cell line, fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis revealed neither trisomy 10 nor loss of the normal chromosome 10. Instead, a tandem duplication event was responsible for amplification of mutant RET. In further studies we could for the first time demonstrate that the genomic chromosome 10 abnormalities in this cell line cause an increased production of mutant RET mRNA. These findings provide evidence for a third second hit mechanism resulting in overrepresentation and overexpression of mutant RET in MEN 2-associated tumors.
98	DR	12506466	NA
98	DR	12499271	RET/papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) oncogenes, generated by recombination of the tyrosine kinase-encoding domain of RET with different heterologous genes, are prevalent in papillary carcinomas of the thyroid. Point mutations of RET cause multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2) familial cancer syndrome and are found in sporadic medullary thyroid carcinomas. Here, we show that ZD6474, a low molecular weight tyrosine kinase inhibitor, blocks the enzymatic activity of RET-derived oncoproteins at a one-half maximal inhibitory concentration of 100 nM. ZD6474 blocked in vivo phosphorylation and signaling of the RET/PTC3 and RET/MEN2B oncoproteins and of an epidermal growth factor (EGF)-activated EGF-receptor/RET chimeric receptor. RET/PTC3-transformed cells-treated ZD6474 lost proliferative autonomy and showed morphological reversion. ZD6474 prevented the growth of two human PTC cell lines that carry spontaneous RET/PTC1 rearrangements. Finally, it blocked anchorage-independent growth of RET/PTC3-transformed NIH3T3 fibroblasts and the formation of tumors after injection of NIH-RET/PTC3 cells into nude mice. Thus, targeting RET oncogenes with ZD6474 might offer a potential treatment strategy for carcinomas sustaining oncogenic activation of RET.
98	DR	12490846	BACKGROUND: Mutations in the RET proto-oncogene that result in constitutive tyrosine kinase activity are the underlying cause for the development of medullary thyroid cancer (MTC). To investigate an alternative strategy in MTC treatment, we took advantage of a dominant-negative RET (dn-RET) mutant, Ret(51)HSCR32, which inhibits oncogenic signal transduction by retaining the oncogenic RET protein in the endoplasmic reticulum, thereby reducing the amount of oncogenic RET protein from the cell surface. METHODS; We constructed an adenoviral (Ad) vector expressing dn-RET under control of the C-cell specific synthetic calcitonin promoter TSE2.CP1 (AdTSE2.CP1-RET(51)HSCR32) and investigated the effect of dn-RET on cell growth of MTC-derived TT cells. RESULTS: Analysis of the subcellular localization of endogenous oncogenic RET protein showed a significant dominant-negative effect of Ad vector-delivered dn-RET in TT cells, resulting in a strong inhibition of cell viability. The observed effect is partially dependent on growth inhibition and possibly apoptosis induction. CONCLUSIONS: In the present study, growth of human MTC cells was successfully inhibited by Ad vector-mediated delivery of RET(51)HSCR32, suggesting that inhibition of oncogenic RET receptor tyrosine kinase expression by a dn-RET mutant might be a powerful approach for in vivo therapy of MTC.
98	DR	12490842	NA
98	NR	12490841	BACKGROUND: In patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A syndrome, prophylactic thyroidectomy is generally recommended at the age of 5 to 6 years. Whether this recommendation is justified for exon 13 mutations is unknown. METHODS: We analyzed the clinical data from 40 patients harboring RET codon 790/791 mutations (exon 13) who had been treated in 4 specialized centers. RESULTS: Mean age was 35.2 +/- 21.6 years (range, 5.1-69.0 years). Thirteen patients were index patients (mean age, 57.7 +/- 11.3 years), 27 patients were screening patients (mean age, 24.4 +/- 16.5 years). In the index group, pT-category was: T0, n = 2; T1, n = 6; T2, n = 2; T3, n = 1; and T4, n = 2. Lymph node metastases were found in 5 patients and distant metastases in 1 patient. Postoperatively, 69% of index patients were biochemically cured. In the screening group, pT-category was: T0, n = 19; T1, n = 7; and T2, n = 1. Lymph node metastases were found in 2 patients. Postoperatively, 93% of screening patients were biochemically cured. The youngest patient with medullary thyroid carcinoma was 13.8 years, the youngest patient with lymph node metastases was 46.4 years. CONCLUSIONS: Patients with RET codon 790/791 mutations seemed to have a less aggressive clinical course compared with patients with classic multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A syndrome. Still, index patients had a lower biochemic cure rate in comparison with screening patients. Timely total thyroidectomy including lymph node dissection is warranted.
98	DR	12490080	The etiology of sporadic medullary thyroid carcinoma (sMTC) remains elusive. While germline gain-of-function mutations in the RET proto-oncogene cause hereditary MTC, somatic RET mutations have been described in a variable number of sMTC. So far, S836S of RET, is the only variant whose association with sMTC has been found in several European cohorts. Because RET variants seem to be associated with MTC, it is plausible that variants in genes encoding for RET coreceptors may play a role in the pathogenesis of sMTC. Recently, we described two possible low penetrance susceptibility alleles in the gene encoding RET coreceptor GFRalpha1, -193C > G and 537T > C, in a German series of sMTC. In this study, we have genotyped nine polymorphisms within GFRA1-3 genes for 51 Spanish sMTC, and 100 normal controls. Our results show that no statistical signification was found when Spanish sMTC patients were compared to controls. Taken together with the observations in the German sMTC series, the present findings suggest that GFRA1-193C > G and 537T > C could be in linkage disequilibrium with other loci responsible for the disease with a founder effect in Germany. Alternatively, the combined observations might also suggest that, if indeed the polymorphisms are functional, the effect is small.
98	DR	12474140	Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) is a common congenital disorder characterized by aganglionosis of the gut. The seemingly unrelated multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), pheochromocytoma, and hyperparathyroidism. Yet, germline mutations in the RET proto-oncogene are associated with both MEN 2 and HSCR. In the former, gain-of-function mutations in a limited set of codons is found, whereas, in the latter, loss-of-function mutations are found. However, germline RET mutation is associated with only 3% of a population-based series of isolated HSCR, and little is known about susceptibility to sporadic MTC. We have found previously that specific haplotypes comprising RET coding single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) comprising exon 2 SNP A45A were strongly associated with HSCR, whereas haplotypes associated with exon 14 SNP S836S were associated with MTC. In this study, we describe three novel intron 1 SNPs, and, together with the coding SNP haplotypes, the data suggest the presence of distinct ancestral haplotypes for HSCR and sporadic MTC in linkage disequilibrium with a putative founding susceptibility locus/loci. The data are consistent with the presence of a very ancient, low-penetrance founder locus approximately 20-30 kb upstream of SNP A45A, but the failure of the SNPs to span the locus presents challenges in modeling mode of transmission or ancestry. We postulate that this founding locus is germane to both isolated HSCR and MTC but also that different mutations in this locus would predispose to one or the other.
98	DR	12415360	Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) 2B is a hereditary syndrome including medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), pheochromocytoma, gastrointestinal (GI) disorders, marfanoid facies, and multiple ganglioneuromas. MTC is the major cause of mortality, and often appears during the 1st decade of life. RET proto-oncogene mutations are responsible for MEN 2B. Other RET mutations cause MEN 2A syndrome, familial MTC, or Hirschsprung's disease. We studied three MEN 2B patients with the aim of delineating the best diagnostic and therapeutic protocol. The gold standards for diagnosis are histochemical study of the rectal mucosa and molecular analysis of RET, which in familial cases detects MEN 2B at a preclinical stage so that early total prophylactic thyroidectomy can be performed. In non-familial cases, the diagnosis can be suggested by the presence of GI symptoms, ganglioneuromas, and/or the typical facies. The intestinal innervation pattern, analyzed with the acetylcholinesterase technique, is pathognomonic for MEN 2B. In our protocol a rectal biopsy is, therefore, the first measure. The surgical treatment of MEN 2B is total thyroidectomy with cervical lymphadenectomy of the central compartment of the neck. When possible, this intervention should be performed prophylactically before 1 year of age.
98	DR	12410354	BACKGROUND: In most examined populations the RET germline polymorphism S836S is found in about 3.6% of the normal population but in about 9% of patients suffering from sporadic C-cell hyperplasia or medullary thyroid carcinoma. The polymorphism S836S is thought to be involved in the development of sporadic medullary thyroid carcinoma. CASE PRESENTATION: We report a 48-year-old woman suffering from primary hyperparathyroidism (parathormone 121-166 pg/ml, normal <72), bilateral diffuse and nodular C-cell hyperplasia (calcitonin after pentagastrin administration 156 pg/ml, normal <4.6), and papillary thyroid carcinoma. Two commercial analyses of RET did not reveal any germline mutation within the known hot spots. However, sequencing revealed the presence of the RET polymorphism S836S. Following total thyroidectomy and removal of two hyperplastic parathyroid glands parathormone decreased to 51 pg/ml and calcitonin was no longer detected. CONCLUSIONS: The pathogenetic importance of the RET polymorphism S836S is still obscure. However, according to the published overrepresentation of the RET polymorphism S836S in patients suffering from apparent sporadic medullary thyroid carcinoma, it is conceivable that it also plays a role in multiglandular endocrine disease.
98	NR	12409662	OBJECTIVE: To describe a genotype-phenotype correlation in MEN2 families with germline mutations of codons 790/791 and discuss options for the therapeutic management of gene carriers. SUMMARY BACKGROUND DATA: Heredity of MEN2 syndromes is caused by a heterozygous germline mutation in the protooncogene. Rare mutations of codons 790/791 associated with incomplete penetrant MEN2A/FMTC phenotype were reported in five families, contraindicating the prophylactic thyroidectomy for the genetically affected children. METHODS: Forty-five patients with a putative sporadic MTC were screened for germline mutations by direct DNA sequencing. Family members of identified index cases underwent genetic analysis. Gene carriers were examined clinically and biochemically, and all gene carriers underwent prophylactic thyroidectomy. RESULTS: Five index patients were identified, four of whom harbored mutations in codons 790/791 and one in codon 634. In the kindreds, four L790F carriers and one Y791F carrier were detected. The thyroid gland histology of L790F carriers revealed medullary thyroid carcinoma in two patients (aged 29 and 50 years) and C-cell hyperplasia in two additional patients (aged 9 and 16 years). The Y791F carrier had a normal histology. CONCLUSIONS: Codon 790/791 mutations had diverse penetrance. Whereas prophylactic thyroidectomy in children is a justifiable approach for codon 790 mutation carriers, the indication for thyroidectomy should depend on the clinical course of codon 791 carriers.
98	DR	12381538	We review genetic aspects and recent advances in our understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of familial chromaffin cell tumors (pheochromocytoma, paraganglioma). About 10 percent of pheochromocytomas are familial and occur as part of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2), von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease, and neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF 1). A subset of paragangliomas, tumors that can also produce and secrete catecholamines, are also familial and occur in patients with germline mutations in genes that encode subunits of the mitochondrial complex II. The precise molecular mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of chromaffin cell tumors remain widely unknown, although recent studies in hereditary tumors help elucidate their development. In MEN 2, overrepresentation of mutant RET in selected adrenomedullary cells may be an important mechanism in initiating the formation of a pheochromocytoma. In VHL disease, pheochromocytoma development appears to occur according to Knudson's two-hit model, a VHL germline mutation and wildtype allelic deletion. Tumorigenesis of NF1-associated pheochromocytomas remains unknown, as does tumor formation (i.e., carotid body tumor) in patients with germline mutations in SDHB, SDHC, and SDHD, genes that encode subunits of the mitochondrial complex II, the smallest complex in the respiratory chain. Many genetic alterations have been found in sporadic chromaffin cell tumors. However, at present such genetic changes are difficult to place into context with regard to tumor formation and progression.
98	DR	12212516	NA
98	DR	12205548	Prophylactic thyroidectomy is recommended for carriers of RET protooncogene mutations owing to their nearly complete penetrance for medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC). However, this guideline is challenged by mutations exhibiting variable penetrance of C-cell pathology. A 38-year-old woman presented with pathologic basal and pentagastrin-stimulated calcitonin levels. Genetic analysis revealed a heterozygous RET protooncogene germline mutation in codon 791 (exon 13) (TAT(Tyr)-->TTT(Phe)), followed by thyroidectomy and systematic central lymph node dissection. Histology showed C-cell hyperplasia (CCH) only. Three additional carriers were identified among family members. The 71-year-old father refused surgery despite pathologic calcitonin levels. The index patient's 37-year-old sister had normal basal and stimulated calcitonin levels, and her 6-year-old son had a 10-fold rise of calcitonin after pentagastrin stimulation. Both patients underwent the same operation as the index patient. The sister had 25 hyperplastic C-cells, but the her son had extensive CCH without MTC. The eldest uncle of the index patient had died of metastatic MTC at the age of 52 with unknown carrier status. Despite variable penetrance, each carrier of a RET protooncogene germline mutation should undergo thyroidectomy, even if basal and stimulated calcitonin levels are normal because at present no test can exclude or predict the age of development of MTC. Moreover, pathologic calcitonin levels cannot differentiate between CCH and MTC. Central lymph node dissection is recommended, as lymph node metastases occur early, significantly worsening the prognosis.
98	DR	12194927	BACKGROUND: Provocative tests for calcitonin (CT) are fundamental in the diagnosis and follow-up of C-cell disease and in the detection of hereditary medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) carriers with unknown RET mutations. A recent report has proposed omeprazole, which can increase endogenous gastrin (GT), as a new provocative test for MTC. METHODS: We compared the omeprazole test (20 mg twice a day for 4 days) to the pentagastrin test (0.5 microg/kg of body weight) for the diagnosis and management of MTC. Twenty healthy individuals and 20 MTC patients with mildly or moderately increased basal CT serum concentrations underwent the pentagastrin and omeprazole tests. RESULTS: In MTC patients, the pentagastrin test produced a significantly higher increase in serum CT than did omeprazole. After the pentagastrin injection, several patients reported unpleasant side effects, including substantial tightness in 38 of 40 participants. No adverse effects were observed during the omeprazole test. A significant direct correlation was recorded between CT% (ratio of CT peak to basal value x 100) and GT% (ratio of GT peak to basal value x 100) during the omeprazole test in MTC patients (r = 0.73; P <0.001). CONCLUSIONS: In spite of several adverse effects, pentagastrin remains the best provocative test for the diagnosis of MTC. Omeprazole may be useful when pentagastrin is contraindicated or refused because of the unpleasant side effects, but further validation is needed.
98	DR	12193298	The occurrence of papillary thyroid carcinoma in patients with RET germline mutations has been described in only eight cases since 1993. We report three women with a RET germline mutation in exon 13 and 14, affecting codon 790, 791, and 804, respectively, who underwent prophylactic thyroidectomy at the age of 29, 39, and 24 years, respectively. Histologic examination revealed C-cell hyperplasia and a small medullary thyroid carcinoma in the first patient and no pathologic changes of the C-cells in either of the other patients. However, all patients had papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC). Concerning the frequency of PTC in patients with RET germline mutations who underwent surgery at our center (n = 104), it was found in 9.1% of all patients with RET mutation in codon 790, 791, and 804 (n = 33) but in none of the 104 patients with RET germline mutations not affecting codon 790, 791, or 804 (p = 0.0015). Our data and the data from the literature suggest a possible pathogenesis of PTC caused by exon 13 and 14 RET mutations that affect the intracellular domain of the encoded protein. Further investigation is necessary to confirm a potential pathogenetic role of exon 13 and 14 RET mutations with regard to the development of PTC.
98	DR	12182058	NA
98	DR	12182057	NA
98	DR	12168961	BACKGROUND: Genetic study of the RET proto-oncogene has modified the management, treatment, and prognosis of medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), multiple endocrine neoplasia 2A (MEN 2A), for patients with less advanced tumor stages. Classically, the diagnosis was based on an increase in basal and poststimulus peak calcitonin (bCT and pCT). Prophylactic thyroidectomy, based on results of genetic testing, may reduce recurrences in MTC. STUDY DESIGN: Of 82 MTC (MEN 2A) patients genetically diagnosed and surgically treated at our center, 22 received a prophylactic thyroidectomy (RET +, bCT and pCT with normal values and asymptomatic). We analyzed age, gender, phenotype, RET mutation, cervical ultrasound, laboratory tests (bCT, pCT, and CEA), surgery, histologic data, TNM, and followup. RESULTS: The 22 patients belonged to 8 families with MTC (MEN 2A). Mean age was 15.2 years (range 5 to 36 years). The RET mutation in 21 patients was Cys-->Tyr and in the remaining patient both in codon 634 in exon 11. The median values of bCT and pCT were 38 pg/mL (range < 15 to 75 pg/mL) and 148.5 pg/mL (range < 15 to 250 pg/mL), respectively. Total thyroidectomy was performed in 8 patients (age < or = 10 years) and associated central neck dissection in 14 patients (age> 10 years). Histologic study showed 7 C-cell hyperplasias and 15 MTCs (8 bilateral); the median size was 0.2 cm (range < 0.1 to 0.7cm); 1 patient had metastatic adenopathies. According to TNM, 7 were stage 0, 14 were stage I, and 1 was stage III. Postsurgery bCT and pCT values were normal in all patients, with a curative rate of 100%. MTC patients compared with C-cell hyperplasia patients were older on average, had higher mean bCT, mean pCT, and mean CEA. CONCLUSIONS: Prophylactic thyroidectomy based on genetic testing allows identification and treatment of patients at an early stage of the disease and decreases recurrence rates. pCT values above the upper limit of normal may be markers for the presence of MTC and should be considered in selecting operative procedures for these patients.
98	PR	12150334	MEN-2A is characterized by medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) with pheochromocytoma and sometimes parathyroid adenoma. In affected members of the family, the risk of MTC is about 100%. Biochemical screening allows tumors to be detected early but even at this stage treatment is not always curative. Missense mutations in exon 10 and 11 of the RET proto-oncogene are associated with MEN-2A. Early detection of this mutation by DNA analysis allows the identification of the carriers of the gene. We performed genetic screening in 88 members of an extended family with MEN-2A and found 18 members positive for RET mutation (Cys634Gly). Only three of these 18 RET positive cases had a previous diagnosis of medullary cancer and/or pheochromocytoma. Up to now, 12 of the RET positive cases have undergone thyroidectomy. There was extended disease with cervical lymph node metastasis in 6 of them, bilateral medullary microcancer in 3 and c-cell hyperplasia in the remaining 3. Three of the 18 RET positive patients had also pheochromocytoma. Primary hyperparathyroidism was present in only one patient. The mean age of diagnosis of medullary cancer was between 25-50 yr and mean age of death was between 35-95 yr in affected members of the family. The family had many other affected members in other cities in Turkey and in other countries throughout the world from Australia to the Netherlands. So this family is perhaps one of the most extended families with MEN-2A.
98	NR	12135859	NA
98	DR	12116277	NA
98	DR	12114809	In this article, we summarize our recent findings on rearranged during transfection (RE7) mutations in a series of 46 sporadic as well as multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 2- associated tumors and present results of our family screening efforts to identify MEN 2 and MEN 1 gene carriers. A nonisotopic polymerase chain reaction-based single-strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) analysis and heteroduplex gel electrophoresis method was used to screen DNA extracted from archival specimens of 22 patients with MEN 2-associated and 24 patients with sporadic tumors for mutations in RETexons 1O, 11, 13, and 16. Point mutations were identified by nonisotopic cycle sequencing of PCR products using an automated DNA sequencer. We found six different missense germ line mutations at cysteine residues encoded by exons 10 and 11 in all patients with MEN 2A or familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC). The frequency of mutations at codon 634 was higher in patients with MEN 2A than with FMTC and a (63)Cys - Arg mutation was associated with parathyroid disease. A germline Met -* Thr point mutation at codon 918 of the RETtyrosine kinase domain encoded by exon 16 was identified in all MEN 2B patients. Nonpredicted inheritable medullary thyroid carcinomas (MTCs) were detected in two patients and a mosaic postzygotic mutation was found in one additional patient. Tumor-specific (somatic) Met - Thr point mutations at codon 918 were identified in 5 of 13 sporadic MTCs and 2 of 8 sporadic pheochromocytomas (PCCs). The remaining sporadic tumors lacked mutations in all four RET exons tested. In exon 13, a nucleic acid polymorphism (CTT/CTG; Leu) at codon 769 was identified, which is present in approx 40% of the examined population. Our study demonstrates that the molecular methods used are not only suitable to identify asymptomatic individuals at risk for MEN 2A, FMTC, and MEN 2B, but also to distinguish sporadic from inherited tumors using archival tissue specimens; and that more tumors than clinically expected are inheritable, indicating the need for genetic analysis of all MTC and PCC patients.
98	DR	12114728	NA
98	DR	12114682	NA
98	NR	12114665	Reports on the association of papillary thyroid carcinoma with paraganglionic or desmoid tumors have appeared infrequently. The former setting usually affects middle-aged females; the latter is typical of familial adenomatous polyposis. We report the case of a 69-yr-old man in whom two abdominal masses had been instrumentally detected following an access of abdominal pain. Save for a moderate hypertension, he was asymptomatic and an impalpable thyroid nodule was detected by ultrasonography. A high urinary noradrenaline output and cytology of the masses raised the suspicion of pheochromocytoma. At laparotomy, an adrenal pheochromocytoma and a paracaval paraganglioma were excised. Subsequently, hemithyroidectomy was performed, and histopathology revealed papillary microcarcinoma. A nodule of desmoid tumor was also removed from the abdominal wall. An analysis of RET, APC, and TP53 gene mutations, and of RET and NTRK1 gene rearrangements, yielded negative results. No in vitro transforming activity was detected in the tumor DNA when assayed in transfection experiments. The lack of a consistent family history also made unlikely the possibility of identifying the putative germline defect by linkage analyses. Should this unusual aggregation of tumors represent a new entity, a number of genetic alterations have now been excluded.
98	DR	12107109	Germ-line point mutations of the RET gene are responsible for multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 2A and 2B that develop medullary thyroid carcinoma and pheochromocytoma. We performed a differential display analysis of gene expression using NIH 3T3 cells expressing the RET-MEN2A or RET-MEN2B mutant proteins. As a consequence, we identified 10 genes induced by both mutant proteins and eight genes repressed by them. The inducible genes include cyclin D1, cathepsins B and L, and cofilin genes that are known to be involved in cell growth, tumor progression, and invasion. In contrast, the repressed genes include type I collagen, lysyl oxidase, annexin I, and tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase 3 (TIMP3) genes that have been implicated in tumor suppression. In addition, six RET-MEN2A- and five RET-MEN2B-inducible genes were identified. Among 21 genes induced by RET-MEN2A and/or RET-MEN2B, six genes including cyclin D1, cathepsin B, cofilin, ring finger protein 11 (RNF11), integrin-alpha6, and stanniocalcin 1 (STC1) genes were also induced in TGW human neuroblastoma cells in response to glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor stimulation. Because the STC1 gene was found to be highly induced by both RET-MEN2B and glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor stimulation, and the expression of its product was detected in medullary thyroid carcinoma with the MEN2B mutation by immunohistochemistry, this may suggest a possible role for STC1 in the development of MEN 2B phenotype.
98	DR	12097207	NA
98	DR	12095936	Mutations that produce oncogenes with dominant gain of function target receptor protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) in cancer and confer uncontrolled proliferation, impaired differentiation, or unrestrained survival to the cancer cell. However, insufficient PTK signaling may be responsible for developmental diseases. Gain of function of the RET receptor PTK is associated with human cancer. At the germline level, point mutations of RET are responsible for multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2A, MEN2B, and FMTC). Mutations of extracellular cysteines are found in MEN2A patients, and a Met918Thr mutation is responsible for most MEN2B cases. At the somatic level, gene rearrangements juxtaposing the tyrosine kinase domain of RET to heterologous gene partners are found in papillary carcinomas of the thyroid. These rearrangements generate the chimeric RET/PTC oncogenes. Both MEN2 mutations and PTC gene rearrangements potentiate the intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity of RET and, ultimately, the RET downstream signaling events. A multidocking site of the C-tail of RET is essential for both mitogenic and survival RET signaling. Such a site is involved in the recruitment of several intracellular molecules, such as the Shc, FRS2, IRS1, Gab1/2, and Enigma. The different activating mutations not only potentiate the enzymatic activity of the RET kinase but also may alter qualitatively RET signaling properties by: (1) altering RET autophosphorylation (in the case of the MEN2B mutation), (2) modifying the subcellular distribution of the active kinase, and (3) providing the active kinase with a scaffold for novel protein-protein interactions (as in the case of RET/PTC oncoproteins). This review describes the molecular mechanisms by which the different genetic alterations cause the conversion of RET into a dominant transforming oncogene.
98	DR	12094702	NA
98	PR	12089863	BACKGROUND: Calcitonin screening programs have proved to be effective in early detection of medullary thyroid carcinoma, not only in patients with known risk factors for the development of hereditary tumors. Thus, more thyroidectomies, based on an abnormal pentagastrin test, can be expected. Here we give summarizing recommendations for reporting C cell pathology. METHODS: All patients underwent total thyroidectomy and were tested for germ-line mutations in the RET-Protooncogene. The entire surgical specimens were blocked and C-cell disorders were assessed using conventional histology and immunohistochemistry. RESULTS: Among 110 patients with an abnormal pentagastrin test, 60 (55%) had medullary thyroid carcinoma (T1 34% [n = 37], T2 14% [n = 16], T4 6% [n = 7]), and 50 (45%) had C cell hyperplasia only. C cell hyperplasia accompanying medullary thyroid carcinoma was found in 13 of 15 familial and in 28 of 45 sporadic patients. All C cell changes were found in the upper two thirds of the thyroid lobes and 83% of the medullary thyroid carcinomas could be identified with frozen sections. CONCLUSION: 1. Abnormal pentagastrin stimulation is always associated with either medullary thyroid carcinoma or C cell hyperplasia. 2. Blocking of the entire upper two thirds of the thyroid lobes is essential for reliable detection of C cell hyperplasia and small medullary thyroid carcinomas. 3. Most medullary thyroid carcinomas can be detected with intraoperative frozen sections. 4. The presence of C cell hyperplasia should always be reported; however its usefulness for indicating familial risk is limited and its role as a preneoplastic condition in patients without RET-protooncogene mutations remains to be elucidated.
98	DR	12087092	Using a yeast two-hybrid screen, we identified Dok1 as a docking protein for RET tyrosine kinase. Dok1 bound more strongly to RET with a multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) 2B mutation than RET with a MEN2A mutation and was highly phosphorylated in the cells expressing the former mutant protein. Analysis by site-directed mutagenesis revealed that tyrosine 361 in mouse Dok1 represents a binding site for the Nck adaptor protein and tyrosines 295, 314, 361, 376, 397, and 408 for the Ras-GTPase-activating protein. We replaced tyrosine 361 or these six tyrosines with phenylalanine (designated Y361F or 6F) in Dok1 and introduced the mutant Dok1 genes into the cells expressing the wild-type RET or RET-MEN2B protein. Overexpression of Dok1 or Dok1-Y361F, but not Dok1-6F, suppressed the Ras/Erk activation induced by glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor or RET-MEN2B, implying that this inhibitory effect requires the Ras-GTPase-activating protein binding to Dok1. In contrast, overexpression of Dok1, but not Dok1-Y361F or Dok1-6F, enhanced the c-Jun amino-terminal kinase (JNK) and c-Jun activation. This suggested that the association of Nck to tyrosine 361 in Dok1 is necessary for the JNK and c-Jun activation by glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor or RET-MEN2B. Because a high level of the JNK phosphorylation was observed in the cells expressing RET-MEN2B, its strong activation via Nck binding to Dok1 may be responsible for aggressive properties of medullary thyroid carcinoma developed in MEN 2B.
98	DR	12072055	NA
98	DR	12061779	Ret is a tyrosine kinase receptor involved in several human diseases germ-line mutations are responsible for multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 syndromes while somatic mutations of Ret are found in sporadic medullary thyroid carcinomas. In the present work, we describe the generation and characterization of a panel of novel monoclonal antibodies to Ret obtained by immunizing mice with a Ret-FC fusion protein. Fifty-five independent monoclonal antibodies recognize Ret-FC by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay but not a non-related FC fusion protein. Twenty antibodies further characterized recognize Ret expressing cells by flow cytometry. Finally, immunoprecipitation analysis showed that these antibodies recognize Ret mature glycosylated and immature forms. Thus, these monoclonal antibodies could be used as diagnostic tools to detect Ret expression, as well as therapeutic tools to downmodulate Ret or to deliver cytotoxic drugs to malignancies that overexpress Ret as neuroblastomas, medullary and papillary thyroid carcinomas, seminomas, and leukemia. (c) 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).
98	DR	12057161	Patients with clinically evident medullary thyroid cancer should have a total extracapsular thyroidectomy with bilateral central neck dissection and an ipsilateral prophylactic or therapeutic modified (functional) radical neck dissection when the primary tumor is greater than 1 cm and when the central neck nodes are positive. A prophylactic contralateral neck dissection should be done when the primary tumor is bilateral and when there is extensive lymphadenopathy on the side of the primary tumor. Patients who have gross, unresectable residual medullary thyroid cancer should receive postoperative external radiotherapy. Patients who are carriers of germ-line RET proto-oncogene point mutations or have an elevated (basal or stimulated) calcitonin levels on screening should have a prophylactic total thyroidectomy before age 6 years. In patients with an elevated basal or stimulated plasma calcitonin level and an intrathyroidal nodule on ultrasound, a total thyroidectomy and central neck lymph node dissection should be done. Patients with persistent or recurrent medullary thyroid cancer should have a complete thyroidectomy (if not done initially) and bilateral central and modified radical neck dissection, including upper mediastinal lymphadenectomy. Patients who are symptomatic from distant medullary thyroid cancer metastases (diarrhea, flushing, weight loss, or bone pain) should be treated with somatostatin analogs. Bone metastases should be resected if possible, and symptomatic lesions that are unresectable should be treated with external radiotherapy. Cytoreductive procedures such as radiofrequency ablation or cryoablation for liver metastases should be considered in symptomatic patients to reduce tumor burden. Localized pulmonary metastases should be resected. Chemotherapy or radioactive immunotherapy (iodine 131 labeled carcinoembryonic antigen monoclonal antibody) protocols should be considered in patients with nonoperative widely metastatic progressing medullary thyroid cancer.
98	PR	12056817	Interleukin-8 (IL-8) is known to contribute to human cancer progression through its potential function as a mitogenic, angiogenic, or motogenic factor. We found a high level of IL-8 production in SK-N-MC human primitive neuroectodermal tumor cells transfected with the human RET gene (SK-N-MC (RET) cells) in response to glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) stimulation. IL-8 was also produced at high levels in TT human medullary thyroid carcinoma and TPC-1 human papillary thyroid carcinoma cell lines both of which express activated RET tyrosine kinase. To investigate which signaling pathways are responsible for IL-8 expression, we treated SK-N-MC (RET) cells with several kinase inhibitors before GDNF stimulation. The results showed that a MEK1 inhibitor, PD98059, a p38MAPK inhibitor, SB202190, and a protein kinase C (PKC) inhibitor, Calphostin C, markedly decreased the IL-8 secretion from SK-N-MC (RET) cells at 24 h after GDNF stimulation. In contrast, a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-K) inhibitor, LY294002, increased its secretion. These results thus suggested that IL-8 production by RET tyrosine kinase is regulated by multiple signaling pathways.
98	NR	12053093	We describe the case of a patient affected by multiple endocrine neoplasia type IIA with a new diagnosis of an asymptomatic right pheochromocytoma. The patient underwent laparoscopic adrenalectomy with adrenal sparing. The removal of the tumor was successful with preservation of about one third of the adrenal gland. At the time of the last follow-up, the patient is well with partial hypoadrenalism without replacement therapy. The limitations to cortical-sparing adrenalectomy imposed by traditional open surgery (small tumor with peripheral location) can be reconsidered using the laparoscopic approach. Laparoscopic cortical-sparing adrenalectomy should become the gold standard for treatment of bilateral pheochromocytoma. The advantages of this technique are its efficacy and its reduced invasiveness with a low rate of complications either during the operation or in the postoperative period. Moreover, the preservation of a portion of the adrenal cortex may prevent the need for a life-long steroid replacement therapy. Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel
98	DR	12042015	BACKGROUND: Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 is an autosomal dominant disorder. MEN 2A is characterized by medullary thyroid carcinoma, pheochromocytoma and hyperparathyroidism; MEN 2B by medullary thyroid carcinoma, pheochromocytoma and characteristic stigmata. Activating germline mutations of the RET proto oncogene are responsible for this hereditary syndrome. Codon 634 mutations are the most common mutations occurring in MEN 2A families whereas a specific mutation at codon 918 is observed in the great majority of MEN 2B families. Analysis of these codons will provide a final diagnosis in the great majority of affected families making unnecessary further studies. To specifically study the codons 634 and 918 we used a minisequencing method as an alternative method to complete sequencing. RESULTS: Using this mutation detection method we were able to reproduce in all cases, representative of 7 families, the information previously obtained by direct sequencing of PCR products. Depending on the number of primers used in the minisequencing reaction, we were able to interrogate either only one nucleotide of the target codon or the three nucleotides simultaneously. CONCLUSIONS: This technique appears as a simple, rapid and efficient method for genetic screening of MEN 2 families. It can be utilized to seek for unknown mutations at specific codons or to screen for previously identified mutations and is therefore of interest to study index cases or individuals at risk. Results suggest that complete sequencing is unnecessary.
98	DR	12037758	BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Currently, molecular genetic diagnostics allow familial types of medullary thyroid carcinoma to be detected at an asymptomatic stage and surgery thus to be performed at a time when prognosis is good. The current report aims to determine the appropriate age for safe prophylactic thyroidectomy in children with multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) 2A and mutations at codon 609 according to genotype-phenotype correlations and will discuss surgical procedures. METHODS: The authors describe the case of a family with hereditary MEN 2A syndrome. A DNA analysis of 7 family members confirmed the diagnosis by a mutation at codon 609 of the RET proto-oncogene. RESULTS: A phaeochromocytoma developed in 2 family members. Four had medullary thyroid carcinoma. A grandson underwent a prophylactic thyroidectomy at the age of 5 on account of genetic evidence. Despite the negative preoperative and intraoperative findings he already had an invasive medullary thyroid carcinoma. CONCLUSIONS: Few genotype-phenotype correlations have been established for MEN 2A disease. According to the natural history of the disease, families with the genotype RET cys609gly should have a more benign disease than high-risk families (mutations at codon 634, 618). From this report the authors conclude that prophylactic thyroidectomy in "609" families should be performed earlier than actually recommended, favorably at the age of 2 to 4 years. Further multicenter studies are needed to provide more clinical and prognostic data for less frequent (codon 609, 630, 791, and 891) RET genotypes. Copyright 2002, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.
98	NR	12036912	We describe a novel hereditary cancer syndrome in the rat that is transmitted by a recessive gene mutation. Animals exhibiting the mutant phenotype develop multiple neuroendocrine malignancies within the first year of life. The endocrine neoplasia is characterized by bilateral adrenal pheochromocytoma, multiple extra-adrenal pheochromocytoma, bilateral medullary thyroid cell neoplasia, bilateral parathyroid hyperplasia, and pituitary adenoma. The appearance of neoplastic disease is preceded by the development of bilateral juvenile cataracts. Although the spectrum of affected tissues is reminiscent of human forms of multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN), no germ-line mutations were detected in the Ret or Menin genes that are responsible for the dominantly inherited MEN syndromes in humans. Segregation studies in F1 and F2 crosses yielded frequencies of affected animals entirely consistent with a recessive autosomal mode of inheritance. The lack of the phenotype in F1 animals effectively excludes a germ-line tumor suppressor gene mutation as the causal event. The absence of mutation of known MEN genes and the unique constellation of affected tissues, plus the recessive mode of inheritance, lead us to conclude that the mutation of an as yet unknown gene is responsible for this syndrome of inherited neuroendocrine cancer.
98	DR	12033991	BACKGROUND: Multiple endocrine neoplasias type 2A (MEN 2A) is a dominantly inherited cancer syndrome. Missence mutations in the codon encoding cysteine 634 of the ret proto-oncogene have been found in 85% of the MEN 2A families. The main tumour type always present in MEN 2A is medullar thyroid carcinoma (MTC). Only 25% of all MTC are hereditary, and generally they are identified by a careful family history. However, some familial MTCs are not easily detected by this means and underdiagnosis of MEN 2A is suspected. METHODS: DNA samples from MEN 2A patients were amplified by PCR. The products were incubated with the restriction enzyme Bst ApI or Bgl I.The samples were loaded in non-denaturing 10% Polyacrilamyde Gel and run at 120 volts for 40 min. The gels were stained with 10 microg/ml ethidium bromide, and the bands were visualized under a UV lamp. RESULTS: We developed a PCR-mutagenic method to check the integrity of the three bases of the cysteine 634 codon. CONCLUSION: The method can be used to detect inherited mutations in MTC patients without a clear family history. The method is relatively simple to use as a routine test in these patients to decrease the underdiagnosis of MEN 2A. In addition, the assay can be used to screen affected families with any mutation in cysteine 634.
98	DR	12019403	BACKGROUND: Only 9 families with familial medullary thyroid carcinoma due to V804M mutation have been reported until now. We describe a large kindred with not only heterozygous but also homozygous members with the V804M mutation. This is, to our knowledge, the first report of a homozygous RET mutation. METHODS: Fifty-three members from 4 successive generations of a family with a high level of consanguinity underwent genetic analysis. The pentagastrin provocative test and biochemical screening to rule out either hyperparathyroidism or pheochromocytoma were performed only on gene carriers of the mutation. RESULTS: Twenty-six gene carriers for V804M mutation were identified (4 homozygous and 22 heterozygous). Three of 4 homozygous patients underwent total thyroidectomy. In 1 patient neither medullary thyroid carcinoma nor C-cell hyperplasia was detected, and in another patient only 3 small foci of C-cell hyperplasia were found on the histologic examination. The pentagastrin stimulation test result was within the normal range in all the heterozygous gene carriers and, consequently, thyroidectomy was not indicated. The screening for both hyperparathyroidism and pheochromocytoma was negative in all patients. CONCLUSIONS: In the family reported, the V804M mutation in heterozygous patients seems not to be enough to express the full disease. This finding strongly supports the concept of the indolent behavior of V804M RET proto-oncogene mutation. In addition, our results suggest that when counseling for preventive total thyroidectomy, the specific mutation of RET proto-oncogene and also the natural history of the disease within a particular family should be considered.
98	DR	12016484	Although sporadic medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) tends to be unicentric and confined to one lobe, total thyroidectomy is usually performed because of the risk of a hereditary or bilateral process. Germline RET mutation analysis can discriminate hereditary MTC and truly sporadic, nonhereditary MTC. We analyzed 72 of 94 patients with MTC to establish the genetic nature and the clinical features of nonhereditary MTC. Since 1996 we have prospectively treated 15 patients with nonhereditary MTC (prospective study group, or PSG) according to a unilateral surgery policy. A group of 22 previously operated patients in whom the nonhereditary nature was established served as controls (retrospective study group, or RSG). Systematic central and ipsilateral neck dissection was performed in both groups. Outcome was assessed using postoperative stimulated serum calcitonin levels; a normal value was considered a biochemical cure. All 24 hereditary MTC patients carried germline RET mutations: 8 of 48 patients with apparently sporadic MTC had the mutations, and 6 of the 8 had bilateral MTC. All 40 patients without mutations had a unilateral tumor. In the RSG group 15 of 22 (68%) patients underwent total thyroidectomy, and the biochemical cure rate was 68%. Although only 3 of 15 (20%) of the PSG patients underwent total thyroidectomy, 12 of the 15 (80%) achieved biochemical cure. Univariate analyses revealed that pathologic node involvement- high T and N stages-was adversely related to biochemical cure. The extent of thyroid resection was not related to biochemical cure. Of 20 patients with node involvement, 10 achieved biochemical cure, indicating the importance of systematic neck dissection. Hemithyroidectomy with systematic central and ipsilateral neck dissection is appropriate surgery for nonhereditary MTC.
98	DR	11987030	Patients with Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia (MEN) type 2A are at risk for early medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC). We performed different screening tests for MTC--a recently reported biochemical screening test using omeprazole-induced calcitonin (CT) stimulation and DNA analysis--in fifteen members of two non-consanguineous Brazilian families with MEN 2A. RET proto-oncogene analysis was carried out by direct DNA sequencing of PCR-amplified products for exons 10 and 11. Family 1 showed a germline mutation (C634Y) in three individuals; a sister and a brother with symptomatic MTC; the former also presented with pheochromocytoma and hyperparathyroidism, and her son was a nine-year-old boy of previously unknown status. Family 2 showed the C634R mutation only in the index case, who presented with cutaneous lichen amyloidosis in addition to MTC, pheochromocytoma and hyperparathyroidism. Neither her parents nor her four brothers showed this genetic abnormality, suggesting a de novo RET proto-oncogene mutation in this patient. The controls and patients presented normal basal gastrin levels and a significant increase after omeprazole. Basal CT levels were elevated in patients with MTC and undetectable in control and asymptomatic family members. No subject showed any increase in CT levels after omeprazole treatment. In conclusion, the two most frequent RET proto-oncogene mutations in MEN 2A are present in Brazilian families. In addition, the specificity of basal and omeprazole-stimulated calcitonin is rather limited, and the efficacy of the omeprazole test still needs to be systematically examined. Therefore, RET proto-oncogene analysis must be the first choice for a screening procedure to identify gene carriers in MEN 2A family members and to permit early prophylactic treatment of MTC.
98	PR	11939755	NA
98	DR	11938683	NA
98	DR	11935126	NA
98	DR	11932300	Sixty-one heterozygotes harboring the germline V804L mutation of the RET protooncogene were identified in five independent families. A total of 31 subjects underwent surgery. Histology identified C cell hyperplasia in 30 cases, isolated in 12 and associated with medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) in 18. Six patients with MTC had lymph node metastases. Among the 14 patients with basal detectable calcitonin (CT) level, 12 had MTC and 2 had isolated C cell hyperplasia. In most individuals carrying 804 RET mutation, C cell disease displayed late onset and an indolent course; a pentagastrin test was negative in the majority of heterozygotes during the first 2 decades and was positive in only half of them during the third and fourth decades of life. Interestingly, concomitant somatic M918T was detected in a 12-yr-old girl with MTC and was likely to be responsible for both the early clinical appearance and the aggressiveness of the disease. Our data show that in these gene carriers, surgery may be postponed to the fourth decade of life or until the pentagastrin stimulation test becomes positive. Indeed, our data should be confirmed on a larger series of V804L carriers, but may offer a balanced strategy to keep under control and prevent development of the full disease phenotype.
98	DR	11914470	Since the discovery of the thyroid C-cell, considerable progress has been made regarding its origin, function, and pathology. In this article an attempt is made to summarize and update our knowledge about physiologic or reactive C-cell hyperplasia, neoplastic C-cell hyperplasia (medullary carcinoma in situ), and medullary microcarcinoma. Seldom recognized preoperatively, physiologic C-cell hyperplasia is associated with inflammatory, metabolic, and neoplastic thyroid disorders as well as with hypercalcemia. However, the pathogenesis is still unclear. Although physiologic C-cell hyperplasia may progress to medullary carcinoma, the full malignant potential is unknown. Problems related to the definition of physiologic C-cell hyperplasia are discussed. Immunohistochemistry and quantitative analysis are required for the diagnosis. By contrast, C-cell hyperplasia associated with MEN II syndromes or familial medullary carcinoma can be diagnosed preoperatively in asymptomatic children or adolescents by the detection of germline mutations of the RET protooncogene. Morphologic and genetic abnormalities support the idea that C-cells in the familial form of C-cell hyperplasia are neoplastic and can be recognized with conventional stains. Therefore, the number of C-cells is irrelevant for the diagnosis. Medullary microcarcinoma is a neoplasm that measures < 1 cm. The sporadic variant is usually an incidental microscopic finding, whereas the familial form can be diagnosed by genetic testing. Its morphologic features and biologic behavior differ from those of larger medullary carcinomas. The frequency of medullary microcarcinoma will probably increase with the use of genetic testing.
98	DR	11900218	BACKGROUND: Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) is an inherited disease caused by germline mutations in the RET proto-oncogene, and is responsible for the development of endocrine neoplasia. Its prognosis is dependent on the appearance and spread of medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC). Relatives at risk can be identified before clinical or biochemical signs of the disease become evident. METHODS: Twenty-one families with MEN 2 (16 families with MEN 2A and 5 families with MEN 2B) were studied. Peripheral blood DNA was amplified by polymerase chain reaction. DNA sequence or restriction enzyme analysis was performed to detect mutations of RET proto-oncogene exons 10, 11, and 16. Molecular analysis was carried out in all index patients as well as in 98 relatives of MEN 2A patients (60 juveniles, ages 6 months to 21 years, and 38 adults, ages 22 to 81 years) and in 13 relatives (6 juveniles ages 10 to 21 years, and 7 adults ages 41 to 66 years) from MEN 2B families. RESULTS: Molecular studies showed a mutation at codon 634, exon 11 in all MEN 2A patients. All MEN 2B patients showed an ATG to ACG (Met918Thr) mutation. In MEN 2A families, 42 out of 98 relatives were affected. Total thyroidectomy was performed in 18 juvenile carriers ages 17 months to 21 years. Histopathologic studies of the glands revealed parafollicular cell (C-cell) hyperplasia in all of these carriers, medullary thyroid carcinoma in 15 carriers, and only one carrier with lymph node metastases. CONCLUSIONS: The consistent finding of C-cell disease in all the juvenile carriers who underwent preventive thyroidectomy emphasizes the relevance of early screening in children at risk of developing MTC. The presence of MTC in the specimen of prophylactic thyroidectomy from a 17 month old girl highlights the importance of thyroidectomy as soon as the molecular diagnosis is confirmed.
98	DR	11889175	TRs are transcription factors that regulate cell proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. They are cellular homologs of the transcriptionally inactive viral oncogene v-erbA. We tested the hypothesis that the functions of TRs could be impaired in cancer tissues as a result of aberrant expression and/or somatic mutations. As a model system, we selected human thyroid papillary cancer, in which the most common abnormalities, RET/papillary thyroid cancer rearrangements (fusion of RET kinase domain to the activating domains of other genes), were found in 40--45% of cases. We found that the mean expression levels of TR beta mRNA and TR alpha mRNA were significantly lower, whereas the protein levels of TR beta 1 and TR alpha 1 were higher in cancer tissues than in healthy thyroid. Sequencing of TR beta 1 and TR alpha 1 cDNAs, cloned from 16 papillary cancers, revealed that mutations affected receptor amino acid sequences in 93.75% and 62.5% of cases, respectively. In contrast, no mutations were found in healthy thyroid controls, and only 11.11% and 22.22% of thyroid adenomas had such TR beta 1 or TR alpha 1 mutations, respectively. The majority of the mutated TRs lost their trans-activation function and exhibited dominant negative activity. These findings suggest a possible role for mutated thyroid hormone receptors in the tumorigenesis of human papillary thyroid carcinoma.
98	DR	11883863	NA
98	DR	11849247	NA
98	DR	11845976	Germline mutations of RET proto-oncogene are connected with inherited cancer syndrome multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2. The syndrome is characterized by incidence of medullary thyroid carcinoma frequently associated with pheochromocytoma and hyperparathyroidism. Genetic testing of family members at risk significantly contributed to diagnosis and management of MEN 2. Early genetic screening for RET mutations allow to detect people who have inherited the MEN2 specific RET mutation with subsequent possibility to of prophylactic thyroidectomy. On the other hand those family members at risk of MEN 2 who had not inherited the mutation do not require further testing. The involvement of RET proto-oncogene in tumorigenesis is reviewed.
98	DR	11839664	Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2) syndromes are inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion with high penetrance. There are three subtypes, namely, MEN2A (multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A), MEN2B (multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B), and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma. The variations in the RET gene play an important role in the MEN2 syndromes. In this work, we have developed a RET oligonucleotide microarray of 67 oligonucleotides to quickly detect RET mutations in MEN2 syndromes. The predominant RET mutations are missense mutations and are restricted to nine codons (codons 609, 611, 618, 620, 630, 634, 768, 804, and 918) in MEN2 syndromes. Missense mutations at codons 609, 611, 618, 620, and 634 have been identified in 98% of MEN2A families and in 85% of familial medullary thyroid carcinoma families. More than 95% of MEN2B patients also had a predominant mutation type at codon 918 (Met-->Thr). RET oligonucleotide microarray can detect RET missense mutations at these nine codons. Theoretically, a total of 55 missense mutation types can occur at eight codons (codons 609, 611, 618, 620, 630, 634, 768, and 804). RET oligonucleotide microarray is designed to detect all of these 55 missense mutation types at these eight codons and one predominant type at codon 918. Fifty-six oligonucleotides were designed for the 56 mutation types at nine codons, and 11 oligonucleotides were designed for the wild types and positive controls. We found RET mutations in all eight of the Korean MEN2A families (a total of 75 members; 27 affected members, 19 gene carriers, and 29 unaffected members) using the developed RET oligonucleotide microarray and an automatic sequencing. Because we found only five mutation types from eight MEN2A families, the international collaborations are required to see whether the RET oligonucleotide microarray may be used as a genetic diagnostic tool. Taken together, the RET oligonucleotide microarray can function as a fast and reliable genetic diagnostic device, which simplifies the process of detecting RET mutations.
98	DR	11820615	All authors integrating the known facts into a model of thyroid carcinogenesis concur that two main histotypes of thyroid cancer exhibit different routes of molecular development. RET rearrangements are an initiating event in papillary carcinoma, and simultaneously the most characteristic mutation for this type of cancer. They are followed by further, not well recognized, mutations. RAS mutations are regarded as a crucial event in the development of follicular tumors already at the adenoma step, while in papillary cancer they belong to the spectrum of secondary mutations, enabling tumor progression. Aberrant DNA methylation, causing loss of P16 tumor supressor gene, may be a common event in both types of cancer. Aneuploidy is seen much more frequently in follicular than in papillary cancer, which also exhibits a low rate for loss of heterozygosity and microsatellite instability. Mutations of the P53 tumor supressor gene are a common feature of undifferentiated thyroid cancers and could be responsible for their aggressive phenotype. RET rearrangements have been proposed as identifying fingerprints for irradiation induced thyroid cancer in children. Our own data speak against this hypothesis. We noted a high frequency of RET/PTC3 mutations in a group of Polish children with papillary thyroid carcinoma, regarded as sporadic cancer.
98	PR	11817715	We describe the unusual case of a Caucasian woman who had a diagnosis of medullary thyroid cancer and papillary microcarcinoma 5 years after a diagnosis of Graves' disease. The patient came to our observation for recurrence of hyperthyroidism. An ultrasound scan revealed diffuse thyroid enlargement with a nodule, recently increased in size. The serum CT and carcinoembrional antigen were elevated, and the fine-needle aspiration cytology with immunocytochemical analysis for CT was suggestive for medullary thyroid carcinoma. The nodular lesion showed intense 111In-pentetreotide uptake, whereas total body scintigraphy with the same tracer and with Thallium-201, 99mTc (V) dimercaptosuccinic acid was negative for lymph node and distant metastasis. The histological examination of thyroidectomy specimens confirmed the diagnosis of medullary thyroid cancer, showing a lymphocytic intratumoral infiltration. The histological analysis of the controlateral lobe showed an occult papillary microcarcinoma. Medullary thyroid carcinoma and papillary microcarcinoma showed intense staining with policlonal anti-RET antibodies, although genetic analysis was negative for RET mutations most frequently involved in familial and sporadic medullary thyroid carcinomas. Possible implications about the coexistence of the 3 thyroid diseases are discussed.
98	NR	11815730	BACKGROUND: Subjects with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) show an increased risk of endocrine tumors, especially pheochromocytoma, whereas thyroid C-cell hyperplasia (CCH) and medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) are very rare events described only in adult patients. METHOD: A case of CCH diagnosed in a 14-year-old girl affected with NF1 is reported. Calcitonin serum level after pentagastin was elevated (286 pg/ml). Genetic testing was performed in order to rule out mutations in the RET proto-oncogene. RESULT: No germline mutation previously reported in MEN2 was detected. Multifocal and bilateral CCH was demonstrated by immunohistochemistry. CONCLUSION: It is suggested that in such a genetic background of high risk for malignancy, CCH could be considered as an extremely rare condition likely preceding MTC. Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel
98	DR	11788682	A kindred was diagnosed with atypical MEN type 2B characterized by medullary thyroid cancer and mucosal neurilemmomas in multiple family members. Mutation analysis revealed a double RET germline mutation, Val804Met and Ser904Cys, in affected individuals. The clinical phenotype, the functional effect of the mutations, and the clinical implications of our findings are discussed.
98	NR	11786689	Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) is characterized by the occurrence of tumours involving two or more endocrine glands; two major forms, referred to as MEN1 and MEN2, are recognized. MEN1 is characterized by parathyroid, pancreatic islet and anterior pituitary tumours, whilst MEN2 is characterized by medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) in association with phaeochromocytoma. There are three clinical variants, referred to as MEN2A, MEN2B and MTC-only. All these forms of MEN may be inherited as autosomal dominant syndromes. The MEN1 gene is on chromosome 11q13 and about 300 MEN1 mutations have been identified. These are of diverse types and are scattered throughout the coding region. There is also a lack of genotype-phenotype correlation. All these findings make it difficult to implement MEN1 mutational analysis in the clinical setting. The situation in MEN2 is more straightforward. The gene causing all three MEN2 variants is located on chromosome 10cen-10q11.2, and is the c-ret proto-oncogene which encodes a tyrosine kinase receptor with cadherin-like and cysteine-rich extracellular domains, and a tyrosine kinase intracellular domain. Specific mutations of c-ret have been identified for each of the three MEN2 variants and mutational analysis has been used in the diagnosis and management of patients and families with the MEN2 variants. Copyright 2001 S. Karger AG, Basel
98	DR	11779046	Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B (MEN2B) syndrome is caused by a missense mutation in the RET gene, which replaces Met918 by Thr in the intracellular kinase domain of the protein. This single amino acid substitution transforms the receptor into a constitutively active monomeric kinase (RET(Men2B)) and produces an autosomal dominant syndrome characterized by medullary thyroid carcinoma, pheochromocytomas, musculoskeletal anomalies, and mucosal ganglioneuromas. The ligand, GDNF, stimulates RET activity through a co-receptor, GFR alpha-1. In vitro studies have shown that the kinase and mitogenic properties of RET(Men2B) are enhanced by GDNF/GFR alpha-1 stimulation. A relevant clinical question is whether ablation of either GDNF or GFR alpha-1 could alter penetrance or severity of the MEN2B syndrome. We report that ganglioneuromatous tumors caused by a RET(Men2B) transgene in mice are not affected grossly or microscopically by the absence of gdnf or gfr alpha-1. Loss-of-function mutations in ret, gdnf, or gfr alpha-1 cause pan-intestinal aganglionosis in mice. We find that expression of the RET(Men2B) transgene in enteric neural progenitors, after they colonize the gut, does not prevent intestinal aganglionosis associated with gdnf or gfr alpha-1 deficiency.
98	DR	11762820	BACKGROUND: As shown in a previous study, the knowledge of the genetic risk in individuals belonging to families at risk of medullary-thyroid carcinoma (MTC) could be associated with impaired quality of life (QoL). PATIENTS AND METHODS: In the present study, we compared the QoL scores obtained in the same period with the subjective quality of life profile (SQLP): in 82 individuals at risk of MTC who had been tested for Ret-mutations; in 200 women at risk of familial breast/ovarian cancer syndrome (BOC); and in a control population of 3,501 healthy volunteers. RESULTS: Significant differences were observed in favour of healthy volunteers as well as individuals at risk of MTC, over women at risk of BOC (mean scores: 0.89, 0.85, and 0.64, respectively, P < or = 0.001), but QoL scores were not statistically different between individuals at risk of MTC and the control population (P = 0.2). However, they were significantly inferior in the subgroup of germline Ret-mutation carriers, as compared to the control population (mean scores: 0.73 and 0.89, P = 0.04). In the latter, the relationships with the children and the family were the most important facets of their QoL. CONCLUSION: Our results confirm the potentially negative impact of the knowledge of the genetic risk of cancer and its consequences in terms of morbidity and follow-up, on the QoL in people followed at oncogenetic visits.
98	DR	11757244	NA
98	DR	11753660	Germline mutations of the RET proto-oncogene are responsible for the familial tumor syndrome called multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) that includes medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC). Although inherited mutations of RET lead to tumor formation in patients with MEN 2, it is not understood why only selected cells develop into tumors. We have recently shown that duplication of the mutated RET allele or loss of the wild-type allele might represent mechanisms of tumorigenesis in patients with MEN 2A-related pheochromocytoma. We now analysed 19 DNA samples of MTC (15 of which were non-microdissected, four of which were microdissected) from patients with MEN 2A. Using polymorphic marker and phosphorimage densitometry analyses, we found allelic imbalance of the mutated and wild-type RET allele in six of 19 DNA MTC samples. Of note, two of the four microdissected tumor DNA samples showed allelic imbalance of RET, whereas only four of the 15 non-microdissected MTC samples did. These results underscore the significance of microdissection in the analysis of tumor DNA. In our study, some of the non-microdissected tumor DNA samples may have failed to display allelic imbalance of RET, because of contamination of tumor DNA with nonneoplastic DNA or noninformative microsatellite marker analysis. Taken together, our results suggest allelic imbalance between mutated and wild-type RET as a possible mechanism for tumor formation in some patients with MEN 2A-related MTC.
98	DR	11746981	The RET proto-oncogene is responsible for inherited medullary thyroid cancer syndromes. RET is also found mutated in sporadic medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) and rearranged in sporadic papillary thyroid carcinomas. Here, we describe a previously unreported germline RET mutation at codon 603 in exon 10 associated with both MTC and nonmedullary thyroid cancer (NMTC) in a kindred. RET may thus not be excluded as a potential candidate for predisposition to some forms of NMTC. Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
98	DR	11742034	Papillary thyroid microcarcinomas (measuring 1 cm or less in diameter) are very common thyroid tumors, which are present in 10% to 35% of post-mortem histopathological examinations of individuals whose death was due to a cause other than thyroid cancer. The molecular basis of this tumor is still poorly understood. Somatic mutations are better characterized in clinically evident papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTCs), the most common involving the proto-oncogene RET, which maps to 10q11.2. Molecular alterations of RET always lead to intra- or interchromosomal rearrangements. In this study we have investigated the status of RET in 21 microcarcinomas, by means of interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). RET was rearranged in 52% of microcarcinomas, a statistically significant higher frequency than that found previously in clinically evident PTCs using the same technique. Moreover, interphase FISH allowed us to detect a putative novel type of rearrangement in a microcarcinoma, and we observed trisomies of chromosome 10 and other chromosomes in two adenomas surrounding two of the microcarcinomas. The strikingly high frequency of RET rearrangements in microcarcinomas strongly suggests that RET plays a role in the initiation of thyroid tumorigenesis but does not seem to be necessary for the further progression of the tumor.
98	DR	11732489	NA
98	DR	11720239	We report the case of a 24-yr-old man with a typical phenotype of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B (MEN 2B). The patient had previously undergone minor surgery to remove multiple tumors on the lip, but he had no further examinations. MEN 2B was suspected owing to characteristic multiple ganglioneuromatosis when the patient presented with a goiter associated with high levels of plasma calcitonin and CEA. Aspiration biopsy cytology revealed medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), and abdominal computed tomography and nuclear scanning with metaiodobenzylguanidine revealed bilateral adrenomedullary tumors. Adrenomedullary function tests showed high levels of serum and urinary fractionated catecholamines, and genetic analysis showed a point mutation in the codon 918 (M918T) of the RET gene. The patient was diagnosed with MEN 2B and underwent right adrenalectomy and total thyroidectomy. No distant metastasis of the MTC was noted although MEN 2B had remained undiagnosed since the ganglioneuromatosis was first noticed. MEN 2B is a rare hereditary disorder, but the occurrence of characteristic ganglioneuromatosis was quite helpful in making the diagnosis.
98	NR	11693822	NA
98	DR	11692159	Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) occurs as a sporadic tumor or in connection with inherited cancer syndromes of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 and familial MTC. Missense RET proto-oncogene mutations and small in-frame deletions are found in most of the cases. In a significant amount of sporadic MTC cases somatic mutation at codon 918 (exon 16), or at codons 609, 611, 618, 620 (exon 10), or codons 630, 634 (exon 11) appear. We report here on three new somatic cell missense mutations of the RET proto-oncogene associated with sporadic MTC. In one tumor mutation at codon 922 TCC(Ser)-->TTC(Phe) in exon 16 was found. In another tumor two mutations at codons 639 GCA(Ala)-->GGA(Gly) and 641 GCT(Ala)-->CGT(Arg) in the exon 11 were observed. Allele-specific PCR followed by sequencing demonstrated the presence of both mutations at the same allele.
98	NR	11688458	NA
98	DR	11678839	Classic genetic rearrangements in papillary carcinoma of the thyroid involve the RET- or TRK proto-oncogenes. We report a novel chromosomal translocation t(3;5)(q12;p15.3), confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization, in a multifocal follicular variant of a papillary carcinoma of the thyroid in a 79-year-old woman, with skin metastases as a presenting symptom. Three years earlier, another cutaneous metastasis on her scalp was misdiagnosed as hidradenoma. Four tumour foci were recognized in the thyroid, two with a follicular variant of papillary carcinoma. To detect loss of heterozygosity, 14 chromosomes were investigated with 59 microsatellite markers. A clonal relationship was detected between the two foci of tumour in the thyroid gland containing follicular variant of papillary carcinoma and one of the skin lesions tested, all demonstrating loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the same region of chromosome 22. Based on earlier reports, the low rate of LOH detected is in agreement with the diagnosis papillary carcinoma of the thyroid. Whole body scintigraphy performed after ablative therapy with radioiodine revealed multiple metastases in the lungs and skeleton. After repeated radioiodine therapy, thyroglobulin under thyroxine suppression became undetectable and post-therapeutic scintigraphy revealed important regression of metastases.
98	NR	11673360	BACKGROUND: The multiple endocrine neoplasia 2 (MEN 2) syndromes [MEN 2A, MEN 2B, and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC)] are caused by germline mutations of the RET protooncogene. Because 85% of MEN 2A patients and 30% of FMTC patients have mutations at codon 634, the recommended molecular analyses begin at exon 11, where codon 634 is located. METHODS: We scanned codon 634 of the RET protooncogene with real-time PCR and fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET), using a unique pair of internal probes to detect mutations localized at codon 634. We compared results with sequencing results in 66 patients. RESULTS: The method detected all codon 634 mutations available in our laboratory (Cys634Tyr, Cys634Arg, Cys634Phe, Cys634Trp). Comparing this method with the direct sequencing of exon 11 in a cohort of 66 patients with MTC, the system identified all 14 MTC patients carrying germline mutations at codon 634. One apparent false-positive result occurred among 52 patients. CONCLUSIONS: The simultaneous scanning of multiple mutations is possible with the FRET system. The method allows rapid characterization of germline mutations at codon 634 in MTC patients.
98	DR	11589684	OBJECTIVE: The molecular basis of sporadic medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) remains elusive. While germline gain-of-function mutations in the RET proto-oncogene cause hereditary MTC, somatic activating RET mutations and loss of heterozygosity of markers in various chromosomal regions representing deletions of tumour suppressor genes, have been described in a variable number of sporadic MTC. A previous report suggested that the presence of a germline variant at RET codon 836 (S836S) was associated with the development of sporadic MTC and, furthermore, that the presence of S836S was highly correlated with somatic RET M918T mutation in the MTC. Thus, we sought to determine if the S836S variant would be associated with sporadic MTC from a completely different population base, that of Andalucia. DESIGN: This is a case-control study to determine whether the presence of RET germline S836S is correlated with sporadic MTC in Andalucia. PATIENTS: Thirty-two patients with sporadic MTC from the Andalucia region of Spain, serviced by our University Hospital, were ascertained throughout the period 1995-99. Sporadic MTC was defined as a lack of personal or family history suggestive of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) and lack of germline RET mutations which define any MEN 2 subtype. A region and race matched cohort of 250 controls was also obtained. MEASUREMENTS: The frequency of the S836S allele was determined in cases and controls and compared using the standard chi-squared statistic and Fisher's exact test. RESULTS: The polymorphic allele frequency at codon 836 in the control population (18/500 chromosomes, 3.6%) differed significantly from the MTC case cohort, 9.3% of case chromosomes (six of 64 alleles, Fisher's exact test, two-tailed, P = 0.043). CONCLUSIONS: Germline RET S836S variant is associated with a two- to three-fold risk of sporadic MTC in the Spanish population, in accordance with a previous study based on German cases. Our observations suggest that this phenomenon might be universal and not limited to Germany.
98	DR	11585664	Germline mutations in the RET proto-oncogene are responsible for two unrelated neural crest disorders: Hirschsprung disease, a congenital absence of the enteric nervous system in the hindgut, and multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2, a dominantly inherited cancer syndrome. Moreover, somatic rearrangements of RET are causally involved in the genesis of papillary thyroid carcinoma. The receptor tyrosine kinase encoded by the RET gene acts as the subunit of a multimolecular complex that binds four distinct ligands and activates a signalling network crucial for neural and kidney development. Over the past few years, a clearer picture of the mode of RET activation and of its multifaceted role during development has started to emerge. These findings, which provide new clues to the molecular mechanisms underlying RET signalling dysfunction in Hirschsprung disease, are summarized in this review.
98	DR	11577645	NA
98	DR	11564857	Hirschsprung's disease (HSCR), a frequent developmental defect of the enteric nervous system is due to loss-of-function mutations of RET, a receptor tyrosine kinase essential for the mediation of glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF)-induced cell survival. Instead, gain-of-function Cys mutations (e.g., Cys(609), Cys(620), and Cys(634)) of the same gene are responsible for thyroid carcinoma (MEN2A/familial medullary thyroid carcinoma) by causing a covalent Ret dimerization, leading to ligand-independent activation of its tyrosine kinase. In this context, the association of Cys(609)- or Cys(620)-activating mutations with HSCR is still an unresolved paradox. To address this issue, we have compared these two mutants with the Cys(634) Ret variant, which has never been associated with HSCR, for their ability to rescue neuroectodermic cells (SK-N-MC cells) from apoptosis. We show here that despite their constitutively activated kinase, the mere expression of these three mutants does not allow cell rescue. Instead, we demonstrate that like the wild-type Ret, the Cys(634) Ret variant can trigger antiapoptotic pathways only in response to GDNF. In contrast, Cys(609) or Cys(620) mutations, which impair the terminal Ret glycosylation required for its insertion at the plasma membrane, abrogate GDNF-induced cell rescue. Taken together, these data support the idea that sensitivity to GDNF is the mandatory condition, even for constitutively activated Ret mutants, to rescue neuroectodermic cells from apoptosis. These findings may help clarify how a gain-of-function mutation can be associated with a developmental defect.
98	DR	11564708	Germline mutations in the Ret protooncogene give rise to the inherited endocrine cancer syndromes MEN types 2A and 2B and familiar medullary thyroid carcinoma. Although it is well accepted that the constitutive active tyrosine kinase of Ret oncogenes ultimately leads to malignant transformation, it is not clear whether a decrease in the autophosphorylation of oncogenic Ret forms can affect the mitogenic and transforming activities of Ret. Potential modulators of the tyrosine kinase activity of Ret could be tyrosine phosphatases that are expressed in human thyroid tissue. Therefore, we investigated the impact of the tyrosine phosphatases SHP1 and SHP2 on the intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity and oncogenic potency of Ret with a 9-bp duplication in the cysteine-rich domain (codons 634-636), which was described in a patient with MEN type 2A recently. SHP1 and SHP2 were stably overexpressed in NIH3T3 fibroblasts together with Ret-9bp. Coexpression of SHP1 with Ret-9bp reduced the autophosphorylation of Ret-9bp by 19 +/- 7% (P = 0.01, n = 4), whereas no effect was seen with SHP2. Furthermore, Ret-9bp could be coimmunoprecipitated with SHP1 but not with SHP2 antibodies. Suppression of the Ret-9bp tyrosine kinase activity by SHP1 caused a decrease in activation of Erk2 (extracellular signal-regulated kinase) and abolished PKB/Akt (protein kinase B) phosphorylation. In addition, diminished Ret-9bp autophosphorylation led to reduced phosphorylation of the transcription factor jun-D. Finally, the inhibitory effect on Ret-9bp signaling resulted in a 40-60% reduction of [(3)H]thymidine incorporation and in reduced ability of NIH3T3 cells to form colonies in soft agar. In conclusion, the data suggest that SHP1 caused a moderate reduction of Ret autophosphorylation, which led to a strong suppression of the Ret oncogene activity.
98	DR	11552438	NA
98	NR	11544105	Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and related molecules, neurturin, artemin and persephin, signal through a unique multicomponent receptor system consisting of RET tyrosine kinase and glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol-anchored coreceptor (GFRalpha1-4). These neurotrophic factors promote the survival of various neurons including peripheral autonomic and sensory neurons as well as central motor and dopamine neurons, and have been expected as therapeutic agents for neurodegenerative diseases. In addition, it turned out that the GDNF/RET signaling plays a crucial role in renal development and regulation of spermatogonia differentiation. RET mutations cause several human diseases such as papillary thyroid carcinoma, multiple endocrine neoplasia types 2A and 2B, and Hirschsprung's disease. The mutations resulted in RET activation or inactivation by various mechanisms and the biological properties of mutant proteins appeared to be correlated with disease phenotypes. The signaling pathways activated by GDNF or mutant RET are being extensively investigated to understand the molecular mechanisms of disease development and the physiological roles of the GDNF family ligands.
98	DR	11524247	Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) occurs usually in sporadic form, but about a quarter of the cases are hereditary and appear as part of one of the multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2) syndromes. Mutations in the RET protooncogene are known to be the cause of the MEN2A and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC) syndromes in the majority of the families. Direct DNA testing allows prophylactic thyroidectomy to be offered to individuals carrying a mutation in the above codons, and in mutation-negative cases it reduces the yearly screening-related burden on family members at risk of the disease. By DNA sequencing and PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphisms, 65 MTC probands were examined for mutations in residues 609, 611, 618, 620 of exon 10, and in residues 634, 768, 804 of exons 11, 13, and 14 respectively of the RET protooncogene. In our study, mutations in the above codons were detected in all of the 14 clinically MEN2A and FMTC families. One of these mutations, TGC609 TCC has not been reported previously. Of the 14 probands with the mutation, 25 relatives also had the identified mutation and 18 relatives proved to be non-carriers. Among the 51 probands with clinically sporadic MTC, none was found to carry a mutation in the above positions even if indirect signs of MTC, pheochromocytoma or hyperparathyroidism could be detected in some families. The frequency of the TGC634AGC mutation is unexpectedly high in our samples, which can probably be attributed to a founder effect. We conclude that screening for mutations in these codons is effective in families fulfilling the strict clinical criteria of MEN2A or FMTC.
98	PR	11502837	C-cell hyperplasias are normally multifocal in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A. We compared clonality, microsatellite pattern of tumor suppressor genes, and cellular kinetics of C-cell hyperplasia foci in each thyroid lobe. We selected 11 females from multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A kindred treated with thyroidectomy due to hypercalcitoninemia. C-cell hyperplasia foci were microdissected for DNA extraction to analyze the methylation pattern of androgen receptor alleles and microsatellite regions (TP53, RB1, WT1, and NF1). Consecutive sections were selected for MIB-1, pRB1, p53, Mdm-2, and p21WAF1 immunostaining, DNA content analysis, and in situ end labeling. Appropriate tissue controls were run. Only two patients had medullary thyroid carcinoma foci. Nine informative C-cell hyperplasia patients showed germline point mutation in RET, eight of them with the same androgen receptor allele preferentially methylated in both lobes. C-cell hyperplasia foci showed heterogeneous DNA deletions revealed by loss of heterozygosity of TP53 (12 of 20), RB1 (6 of 14), and WT1 (4 of 20) and hypodiploid G0/G1 cells (14 of 20), low cellular turnover (MIB-1 index 4.5%, in situ end labeling index 0.03%), and significantly high nuclear area to DNA index ratio. MEN 2A (germline point mutation in RET codon 634) C-cell hyperplasias are monoclonal and genetically heterogeneous and show down-regulated apoptosis, findings consistent with an intraepithelial neoplasia. Concordant X-chromosome inactivation and interstitial gene deletions suggest clone expansions of precursors occurring at a point in embryonic development before divergence of each thyroid lobe and may represent a paradigm for other germline mutations.
98	DR	11502806	Familial medullary thyroid carcinoma only is related to germline mutations in the protooncogene RET, mainly in exons 10, whereas noncysteine mutations (exons 13-15) are considered infrequent. We analyzed 148 patients from 47 familial medullary thyroid carcinoma only families, and we found noncysteine RET mutations in 59.5% of these families. Of the index cases with noncysteine mutations, 43.4% presented with a multinodular goiter and high basal calcitonin; they were older at diagnosis than those with mutation in exon 10 and had more multifocal medullary thyroid carcinoma, but no difference in size, bilaterality, presence of C cell hyperplasia, or nodal metastases was found. Gene carriers with noncysteine RET mutations had a lower incidence of medullary thyroid carcinoma (78.2% vs. 94.1%) than those with mutation in exon 10; 20.2% had C cell hyperplasia only, although thyroidectomized at an older age. In conclusion, familial medullary thyroid carcinoma with noncysteine RET mutations are not infrequent and are overrepresented in presumed sporadic medullary thyroid carcinoma, suggesting that RET analysis should routinely be extended to exons 13, 14, and 15. The phenotype is characterized by a late onset of the disease, suggesting a delayed appearance of C cell disease rather than a less aggressive form. In familial medullary thyroid carcinoma gene carriers, the optimal timing for thyroidectomy remains controversial. Based on these data, we propose that surgery should be performed before elevation of the basal calcitonin level, potentially as soon as the pentagastrin test becomes abnormal.
98	DR	11494127	Gain-of-function mutations in the gene encoding the receptor tyrosine kinase RET have been identified as the aetiological factor for multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN2A). MEN2A is a dominantly-inherited cancer predisposition syndrome characterized by medullary thyroid carcinoma, a tumour of the calcitonin-producing thyroid C-cells. There are three isoforms of RET: RET9, RET43 and RET51, and although in vitro evidence suggests they vary in cellular transformation activities, little is known about their function in tumorigenesis in vivo. To address this, we used RET51 cDNA to construct mice in which the most frequent MEN2A mutation, Cys-634-Arg, was expressed under the control of the human calcitonin promoter (CT-2A mice). These mice developed C-cell tumours resembling human MTC and follicular tumours resembling human papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) depending on the founder line examined. One founder line developed compound MTC/PTC at low frequency (8%) and pancreatic cystadenocarcinoma. CT-2A mice also displayed a developmental defect in thyroid follicular structure, in which much of the thyroid was occupied by large irregular cystic follicles thought to be derived from the ultimobranchial body, a developmental precursor of the thyroid gland. The CT-2A mice will provide a suitable model to further study the effects of the MEN 2A RET mutation in vivo.
98	NR	11482345	BACKGROUND: Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 2b syndrome is accompanied by typical ocular findings; however, the disease is often only diagnosed at an advanced stage by symptoms of C-cell carcinoma or pheochromocytoma and is then fatal in most cases. Therefore, the importance of ophthalmic assessment in making the diagnosis has to be stressed. METHODS: The history and ocular findings of a patient with MEN 2b syndrome are described, and a brief overview of the syndrome is given. RESULTS: Slit-lamp examination showed extremely thickened corneal nerves as well as multiple small plexiform and nodular subconjunctival tumors. Both eyes also displayed thickened upper and lower eyelids. A molecular genetic study of the RET proto-oncogene showed a heterozygous ATG to ACG mutation in codon 918 of exon 16. CONCLUSION: Greatly thickened corneal nerves and subconjunctival tumors may be the first hint of MEN 2b. Whenever greatly thickened corneal nerves are detected, MEN 2b must be ruled out.
98	PR	11471675	NA
98	DR	11465538	Control of cell growth and differentiation occurs via extracellular signals known as growth factors. Growth factors are high affinity ligands for transmembrane receptors belonging to the family of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). A number of genetic evidences have implicated RTKs in human diseases including developmental disorders and cancer. For instance, germline missense mutations involving the Ret receptor are found in patients affected by multiple endocrine neoplasia types 2A and 2B (MEN2A and MEN2B) or familial medullary thyroid carcinomas. Somatic mutations in the Kit receptor are found in mastocytomas and in gastrointestinal tumors. Germline and sporadic mutations of the Met receptor have been described in kidney and hepatocellular carcinomas. Overexpression of the HER-2/neu receptor in breast cancer has been associated with tumor progression. The enzymatic activity of RTKs is strictly regulated and is usually inhibited under basal conditions. Receptor activation triggers a biochemical signalling cascade inside the cytoplasm, named signal transduction, which is subverted during the malignant transformation of cells. Signal transduction by RTKs is a multistep process which includes: (i) Ligand binding and receptor dimerization, (ii) receptor phosphorylation on tyrosine residues; (iii) recruitment to the receptor and activation of cytoplasmic signaling molecules that transmit signals to the nucleus. Each of the steps involved in this process can potentially be targeted to block the aberrant properties of tyrosine kinase receptors. By using the MET oncogene as a model this review focuses on the strategies that can be applied to therapeutically target RTKs.
98	DR	11462876	NA
98	DR	11454140	OBJECTIVE: The RET proto-oncogene is known to be the susceptibility gene for various disease phenotypes, including multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2). Recent studies have also suggested an involvement of RET in the development of the mammalian kidney. Although kidney agenesis or dysgenesis has been observed in mice lacking functional ret, no clinically relevant kidney abnormalities have been reported in individuals with known RET mutations and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC). We have studied a family with five members affected with isolated FMTC. DNA analysis was performed and the involved RET mutation was identified. Amongst these patients were a woman and her son. DESIGN: Case report. SETTING: University department. PATIENTS: A 32-year-old woman and her son with FMTC and unilateral renal agenesis. RESULTS: The woman's abdominal ultrasound findings demonstrated unilateral renal absence of the left kidney. Her son, when only a few months old, had undergone surgical treatment for Hirschsprung's disease. Abdominal ultrasonography was performed recently, and left-side renal absence was diagnosed. Intravenous pyelography confirmed the agenesis of his left kidney, whilst the contralateral kidney displayed compensatory hypertrophy. CONCLUSIONS: The involvement of the RET proto-oncogene in the early growth and differentiation of the human kidney is now generally accepted. We believe that at least a proportion of patients with MEN 2 may have undiagnosed renal malformations. We suggest therefore that noninvasive imaging techniques, such as ultrasonography, should be used to explore the presence of renal abnormalities in subjects with demonstrated RET mutations.
98	DR	11444172	Cancer is a disease of genes. Detection of genetic abnormalities associated with cancers of various cell types can now be used for genetic counseling, diagnosis or treatment selection. In the case of thyroid cancer, genetic testing for mutations of the RET oncogene has had a profound effect on the management of medullary thyroid carcinomas. There is also considerable information on the genetic changes associated with development and progression of cancers of thyroid follicular cells, although these have not yet proven to be of practical value for clinical diagnosis or to guide prognosis and therapy.
98	PR	11443855	NA
98	PR	11443849	NA
98	DR	11443191	Rearrangements of the RET proto-oncogene may occur in both naturally occurring and radiation-induced papillary thyroid carcinomas. Conflicting results on the frequency and type of RET/PTC rearrangements have been reported in relation to age, radiation exposure, and histological tumor variant. We designed the present study to evaluate in a single laboratory, using the same methodologies, the pattern of RET/PTC activation in thyroid tumors from different groups of patients (exposed or not exposed to radiation, children or adults, with benign or malignant tumors) in relationship to the above mentioned variables. We studied 154 patients with benign nodules (n = 65) or papillary thyroid cancer (n = 89). In the last group, 25 were Belarus children exposed to the post-Chernobyl radioactive fallout, 17 were Italian adults exposed to external radiotherapy for benign diseases, and 47 were Italian subjects (25 children and 22 adults) with no history of radiation exposure. Among patients with benign thyroid nodules, 21 were Belarus subjects (18 children and 3 adults) exposed to the post-Chernobyl radioactive fallout, 8 were Italian adults exposed to external radiation on the head and neck, and 36 were Italian adults with naturally occurring benign nodules. The overall frequency of RET/PTC rearrangements in papillary thyroid cancer was 55%. The highest frequency was found in post-Chernobyl children and was significantly higher (P = 0.02) than that found in Italian children not exposed to radiation, but not significantly higher than that found in adults exposed to external radiation. No difference of RET/PTC rearrangements was found between samples from irradiated (external x-ray) or not irradiated adult patients, as well as between children and adults with naturally occurring, not irradiated, thyroid cancer. When analyzing the type of RET/PTC rearrangement (RET/PTC1 or RET/PTC3), no major difference was apparent. In addition, eight cases with an unknown RET/PTC rearrangement and three cases with the concomitant expression of RET/PTC1 and RET/PTC3 were found. No significant correlation was observed between the frequency and/or the type of RET/PTC rearrangement and clinical-epidemiological features of the patients such as age at diagnosis, age at exposure, histological variant, gender and tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) categories. RET/PTC rearrangements were also found in 52.4% of post-Chernobyl benign nodules, in 37.5% of benign nodules exposed to external radiation and in 13.9% of naturally occurring nodules (P = 0.005, between benign post-Chernobyl nodules and naturally occurring nodules). The relative frequency of RET/PTC1 and RET/PTC3 in rearranged benign tumors showed no major difference. In conclusion, our results indicate that the presence of RET/PTC rearrangements in thyroid tumors is not restricted to the malignant phenotype, is not higher in radiation-induced tumors compared with those naturally occurring, is not different after exposure to radioiodine or external radiation, and is not dependent from young age. Other factors, probably influenced by ethnic or genetic background, may act independently from or in cooperation with radiation, to trigger the DNA damage leading to RET proto-oncogene activation.
98	NR	11443172	Pseudohypoparathyroidism Ia (PHP Ia) is characterized by resistance to PTH and many other stimuli because of deficiency of stimulatory G protein alpha-subunit. To determine the incidence, natural history, and mechanism of C cell dysfunction in PHP, calcitonin assays were performed in six patients with PHP Ia and four with pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism from three unrelated families. Controls included healthy subjects and patients with PHP Ib or hypoparathyroidism. The mean basal level of calcitonin was higher in PHP Ia patients than in controls (95.3 +/- 112.7 vs. 3.7 +/- 2.4 pg/mL; P = 0.005; n < 10). In PHP Ia patients, calcitonin levels rose over the normal range (30 pg/mL) after pentagastrin infusion in five patients and remained normal in one. Familial medullary thyroid carcinoma was clinically, biologically, and ultrasonographically ruled out over a mean follow-up exceeding 3 yr. Genomic screening for RET protooncogene mutations failed to reveal any anomaly. The calcitonin infusion test, which induced a significant increase in plasma cAMP in controls 30 and 60 min after infusion, failed to produce this response in PHP Ia patients, suggesting that the action of calcitonin was specifically impaired. PHP Ia may therefore be an independent etiology of hypercalcitoninemia and hyperresponsiveness to pentagastrin infusion.
98	DR	11442663	We report a case of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B (MEN 2B) in a 30-year-old woman. There was no family history of MEN 2B in her family. DNA testing was carried out and a point mutation was found in exon 16, codon 918 (ATG to ACG) in the RET proto-oncogene. The woman died of medullary thyroid carcinoma, 13 years after a total thyroidectomy.
98	DR	11429053	Germline mutations in the RET proto-oncogene are the cause of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2A and 2B) and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC). Some cases of sporadic medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) have also been reported to have mutations in the RET gene. However, two previous reports have given discrepant results on the frequency of the mutations in RET in sporadic MTCs in Japan. To clarify this problem, we analyzed mutations in RET exon 16 in 72 sporadic MTCs by means of the two methods used in the previous studies, direct sequencing and polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP). Mutations in exon 16 were detected in only 2 of 72 cases of sporadic MTC. These results suggest that when a MTC has a mutation in RET exon 16, it is more likely to be a hereditary MTC than a sporadic one in Japan.
98	NR	11424598	NA
98	PR	11423973	Cancers develop and progress via activation of oncogenes and loss of tumor suppressor genes, a progression that can be recapitulated through cross breeding mouse strains harboring genetic mutations. To define the role of RET/PTC3, p53 and Fhit in thyroid carcinogenesis, we intercrossed RET/PTC3 transgenics with p53-/- mice. This new strain, RET/PTC3p53-/-, succumb to rapidly growing and strikingly large multilobed thyroid tumors containing mixtures of both well and poorly differentiated, highly proliferative follicular epithelial cells. Interestingly, transplanted tumors from RET/PTC3p53-/- mice grew in SCID but not syngeneic immunocompetent mice indicating that these advanced tumors were immunogenic. RET/PTC3 protein expression was reduced to undetectable levels in tumors of older mice suggesting that the continued elevated expression of RET/PTC3 may not be necessary for tumor progression. Similarly, expression of Fhit protein was reduced in early tumors and undetected in older tumors irrespective of tumor histopathology. In contrast to RET/PTC3p53-/- mice, RET/PTC3Fhit-/- mice did not develop advanced thyroid carcinomas. These studies support a model of human thyroid cancer whereby thyroid epithelium expresses RET/PTC3 protein at early stages of tumor development, followed by the reduction of RET/PTC3 and loss of p53 function with progressive reduction of Fhit protein expression coincident with malignant progression.
98	DR	11407658	The list of multiple endocrine neoplasias (MENs) that have been molecularly elucidated is growing with the most recent addition of Carney complex. MEN type 1 (MEN 1), which affects primarily the pituitary, pancreas, and parathyroid glands, is caused by mutations in the menin gene. MEN type 2 (MEN 2) syndromes, MEN 2A and MEN 2B that affect mainly the thyroid and parathyroid glands and the adrenal medulla, and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC), are caused by mutations in the REToncogene. Finally, Carney complex, which affects the adrenal cortex, the pituitary and thyroid glands, and the gonads, is caused by mutations in the gene that codes for regulatory subunit type 1A of protein kinase A (PKA) (PRKAR1A) in at least half of the known patients. Molecular defects have also been identified in syndromes related to the MENs, like Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) (the STK11/LKB1 gene), and Cowden (CD; the PTEN gene) and von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHLD; the VHL gene). Although recognition of these syndromes at a young age generally improves prognosis, the need for molecular testing in the diagnostic evaluation of the MENs is less clear. This review presents the newest information on the clinical and molecular genetics of the MENs (MEN 1, MEN 2, and Carney complex), including recommendations for genetic screening, and discusses briefly the related syndromes PJS, CD and VHLD.
98	DR	11395220	The present report describes an unusual presentation of a female with MEN-2A. During 14 years she only had moderate symptoms. Occasionally she had slightly elevated basal calcitonin levels and abnormal pentagastrin tests, whereas thyroid scanning and echography were normal. At the age of 70 she developed bilateral pheochromocytoma. DNA-analysis demonstrated a germline Cys 611 Tyr mutation in the RET proto-oncogen on chromosome 10q11.2. One year after bilateral adrenalectomy again she developed overt symptoms of pheochromocytoma. The differential diagnosis and the importance of routine screening for RET mutations are discussed.
98	DR	11390647	The receptor tyrosine kinase RET functions as the signal transducing receptor for the GDNF (for "glial cell-derived neurotrophic factors") family of ligands. Mutations in the RET gene were implicated in Hirschsprung disease (HSCR), multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2), and thyroid carcinomas. In this report we demonstrate that the docking protein FRS2 is tyrosine phosphorylated by ligand-stimulated and by constitutively activated oncogenic forms of RET. Complex formation between RET and FRS2 is mediated by binding of the phosphotyrosine-binding domain of FRS2 to pY1062, a residue in RET that also functions as a binding site for Shc. However, overexpression of FRS2 but not Shc potentiates mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase activation by RET oncoproteins. We demonstrate that oncogenic RET-PTC proteins are associated with FRS2 constitutively, leading to tyrosine phosphorylation of FRS2, MAP kinase stimulation, and cell proliferation. However, loss-of-function HSCR-associated RET mutants exhibit impaired FRS2 binding and reduced MAP kinase activation. These experiments demonstrate that FRS2 couples both ligand-regulated and oncogenic forms of RET, with the MAP kinase signaling cascade as part of the response of RET under normal biological conditions and pathological conditions, such as MEN 2 and papillary thyroid carcinomas.
98	DR	11389085	Specific point mutations of the RET proto-oncogene have been demonstrated to be responsible for multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) types 2A and 2B, for familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) syndromes, as well as for sporadic MTC. Here we show that nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB is activated in RET-associated C-cell carcinoma specimens. TT cells, a human MTC cell line expressing MEN 2A type RET, display transcriptionally active RelA(p65) in the nucleus. NF-kappaB activity in these cells is attributable to constitutive IkappaB kinase (IKK) activity and high turn over of IkappaBalpha. RET harboring the mutations C634R (MEN 2A) or M918T (MEN 2B), in contrast to wild-type RET, activates a NF-kappaB-dependent reporter construct upon transient transfection in HeLa cells. We show that the prototype RET mutation C634R enhances phosphorylation of IkappaBalpha by IKKbeta but not by IKKalpha. RET-induced NF-kappaB and IKKbeta activity requires Ras function but does neither involve the classical mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase nor the phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt pathways. In contrast, RET-induced NF-kappaB activity is dependent on Raf and MEKK1. Inhibition of constitutive NF-kappaB activity results in cell death of TT cells and blocks focus formation induced by oncogenic forms of RET in NIH 3T3 cells. These results suggest that RET-mediated carcinogenesis critically depends on IKK activity and subsequent NF-kappaB activation.
98	NR	11389034	The molecular cloning of the t(5;10)(q33;q22) associated with atypical chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is reported. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), Southern blot, and reverse transcriptase- polymerase chain reaction analysis demonstrated that the translocation resulted in an H4/platelet-derived growth factor receptor betaR (PDGFbetaR) fusion transcript that incorporated 5' sequences from H4 fused in frame to 3' PDGFbetaR sequences encoding the transmembrane, WW-like, and tyrosine kinase domains. FISH combined with immunophenotype analysis showed that t(5;10)(q33;q22) was present in CD13(+) and CD14(+) cells but was not observed in CD3(+) or CD19(+) cells. H4 has previously been implicated in pathogenesis of papillary thyroid carcinoma as a fusion partner of RET. The H4/RET fusion incorporates 101 amino acids of H4, predicted to encode a leucine zipper dimerization domain, whereas the H4/PDGFbetaR fusion incorporated an additional 267 amino acids of H4. Retroviral transduction of H4/PDGFbetaR, but not a kinase-inactive mutant, conferred factor-independent growth to Ba/F3 cells and caused a T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma in a murine bone marrow transplantation assay of transformation. Mutational analysis showed that the amino-terminal H4 leucine zipper domain (amino acids 55-93), as well as H4 amino acids 101 to 386, was required for efficient induction of factor-independent growth of Ba/F3 cells. Tryptophan-to-alanine substitutions in the PDGFbetaR WW-like domain at positions 566/593, or tyrosine-to-phenylalanine substitutions at PDGFbetaR positions 579/581 impaired factor-independent growth of Ba/F3 cells. H4/PDGFbetaR is an oncoprotein expressed in t(5;10)(q33;q22) atypical CML and requires dimerization motifs in the H4 moiety, as well as residues implicated in signal transduction by PDGFbetaR, for efficient induction of factor-independent growth of Ba/F3 cells. (Blood. 2001;97:3910-3918)
98	NR	11388386	NA
98	DR	11386462	Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN-2) is a hereditary syndrome characterized by medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), pheochromocytoma and hyperplasia or adenoma of the parathyroid gland with hyperparathyroidism. Recent genetic studies have identified the presence of germline missense mutations in the RET proto-oncogene in almost 100% of MEN-2 patients. We report here three generations of one MEN-2 family with rare missense mutation at codon 618 (Cys-->Arg) of the RET proto-oncogene. The first patient was surgically treated at the age of 63 years but died of bone metastasis. His two children (29-year-old daughter and 25-year-old son) were treated surgically for MTC and neck lymph node metastasis. Germline mutations of the RET proto-oncogene of these three MTC patients and two children of the 29-year-old daughter (9-year-old female and 7-year-old male) were examined. Three MTC patients and the 9-year-old female possessed the mutation. The phenotype of the family with this rare point mutation of the RET proto-oncogene is reported.
98	DR	11376404	Genetic testing for RET germline mutations affords rapid identification of germline carriers, offering the prospect of cure before C-cell hyperplasia (CCH) has progressed to medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC). Although nonindex RET mutation carriers have a better prognosis than do the index patients, it remains to be ascertained whether age represents a risk factor for MTC when screening patients. The current institutional study (October 1994 through June 1999) was set up to compare asymptomatic nonindex patients who were grouped by age: < 20 years and > or = 20 years. Inclusion criteria were confirmed RET mutations in the germline, with no MTC being more advanced than pT1pN1M0. Adult patients (> or = 20 years) had MTC significantly more often (84% vs. 43%), significantly larger tumors (5 mm vs. 3 mm), and significantly higher basal calcitonin levels preoperatively (78.0 vs. 9.7 pg/ml) than their pediatric/adolescent counterparts (< 20 years). There was a close correlation between pT1 MTC and an elevated basal serum calcitonin level (r = 0.67; Spearman's rho). All three patients with lymph node metastases from MTC had elevated basal calcitonin levels. The two groups did not differ in terms of multifocality of MTC (pT1b), lymph node involvement (pN1) or bilateral lymph node metastasis (pN1b), or preoperative stimulated and postoperative basal and stimulated serum calcitonin. Prophylactic thyroidectomy should not be postponed beyond the age of 20, and it should be performed before basal serum calcitonin has turned positive. Pathologic conversion of stimulated serum calcitonin obviously marks the time in carriers of RET germline mutations when surgery should be scheduled at the latest to be prophylactic.
98	DR	11370543	NA
98	NR	11370534	NA
98	DR	11360200	In contrast to the hereditary form of medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), little is known about the etiology of sporadic MTC. Somatic gain-of-function mutations in the RET proto-oncogene, encoding a receptor tyrosine kinase, are found in an average of 40% of sporadic MTC. We analysed 31 sporadic MTC for somatic and germline variants in GFRA1, GFRA2 and GFRA3 which encode the co-receptors of RET. Although there were no somatic mutations in any of the three genes, a sequence variant (-193C>G) in the 5'-UTR of GFRA1 was found in 15% of cases. Three patients were heterozygous (het); another three patients homozygous (hom) for the G variant. The G allele was not observed in 31 race-matched normal controls. Hence, the relative frequency of this variant in sporadic MTC cases and controls differed significantly (P<0.05). Since this variant lies in the 5' UTR, likely at the transcriptional start site, we analysed for differential expression of GFRalpha-1 at the transcript and protein levels. At the mRNA level, GFRA1 was over-expressed in tumors harboring the rare variant (P=0.06). The presence of the G polymorphic allele seemed to be associated with increased expression by immunostaining for GFRalpha-1. Interestingly, cytoplasmic staining was stronger in intensity for het patients and nuclear staining predominant in hom cases. In conclusion, mutation analysis of GFRA1, GFRA2 and GFRA3 revealed over-representation of a rare variant in GFRA1 (-193C>G) in the germline of sporadic MTC cases. Our data suggest that the mechanism is related to over-expression of GFRalpha-1 and differential subcellular compartmentalization but the precise mechanism as to how it acts as a low penetrance susceptibility allele for the development of sporadic MTC remains to be elucidated.
98	DR	11356339	Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 2B is a heritable endocrine disorder characterized by medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), pheochromocytoma, multiple mucosal neuromas, and a marfanoid habitus. Intestinal ganglioneuromatosis, corneal nerve thickening and skeletal abnormalities are also often present. The disease is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion and is caused by a single mutation in the RET proto-oncogene, with a methionine to threonine substitution at codon 918. The MTC in MEN 2B presents at an earlier age and tends to be more aggressive than the MTC in MEN 2A. It is multicentric and bilateral and occurs as young as age 3, with early lymph node metastases. Pheochromocytoma is also often bilateral but is rarely malignant. If pheochromocytoma is detected, adrenalectomy should precede thyroidectomy to avoid intraoperative catecholamine crisis. Patients at risk for MEN 2B should undergo genetic screening in infancy. Total thyroidectomy should be performed on all patients positive for RET mutations even prior to the onset of clinical symptoms.
98	DR	11351254	Apart from the RET proto-oncogene (RET) no other genes have been found to be involved in medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) tumorigenesis. Germline RET mutations are seen virtually in all familial forms of MTC and somatic RET mutations are often detected in sporadic MTC. In sporadic MTCs the RET gene is mutated in codon 918, where a methionine is substituted to a threonine (M918T). In this study 24 MTCs were analyzed by comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) for chromosomal imbalances. Overall, alterations were detected in approximately 60% of the samples. The most common aberrations were gains on chromosome 19q (29%), 19p (21%), 11c-q12 (12.5%), and 22q (12.5%) and losses on 13q21 (21%) and 3q23-qter (12.5%). Gain of chromosome 11c-q12 was only detected in samples from patients whom died of MTC (p=0.001). These MTCs also harbored the somatic RET M918T mutation and also showed the highest numbers of CGH alterations in the series (p<0.003). Although there was a tendency towards a higher number of CGH imbalances in the tumors with RET M918T mutation, this difference was not significant. The results indicate that MTC is a comparatively genetically stable tumor, and that chromosomal regions 19q, 19p, 13q and 11q may be involved in MTC carcinogenesis.
98	NR	11340615	BACKGROUND: Radiation is an accepted risk factor for thyroid carcinogenesis in children. Recent observations in large cohorts of children and young adults who developed papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTC) related to accidental radiation exposure after the Chernobyl reactor accident revealed typical genetic aberrations shedding light on genetic determinants and mechanisms of radiation-induced carcinogenesis. PROCEDURE: A molecular genetic analysis was performed on 191 post-Chernobyl PTC by RT-PCR, multiplex PCR, DNA sequencing, and in some cases 5'RACE. Determination of point mutations was by means of PCR and either allele-specific oligonucleotide hybridization or SSCP and DNA sequencing. RESULTS: In various sporadic thyroid tumor types of adults structural genetic aberrations have been found involving mutations of RAS (codon 12, 13, 61), p53 (exons 5 to 8), Gsalpha (codon 201 and 227), and, at a low prevalence, the receptor tyrosine kinases RET or NTRK1. In contrast, in radiation-induced PTC of children RET rearrangements are by far the most prevalent genetic aberrations. In these RET rearrangements, the transmembrane and extracellular domains of RET are lost, and are replaced by parts of other genes at the 5' end. These genes always contain coiled-coil domains with dimerization potential and lead to constitutive, ligand-independent activation of the ret tyrosine kinase domain at the 3' end of the fusion product. The most frequent radiation-induced RET gene fusions involve the ELE1 (ARA70) gene, a transcription coactivator of the androgen receptor (PTC3), and H4, a gene of unknown function (PTC1). Both rearrangements originate from DNA double strand breaks with repair by intrachromosomal balanced paracentric inversion and recombination by illegitimate DNA endjoining at small stretches of homologous nucleotide sequences and direct or inverted repeats, without significant breakpoint clusters in the involved introns. In addition, five different RET-fused genes, RIalpha, GOLGA5, HTIF, RFG7 and RFG8, have been detected leading to the PTC2, 5, 6, 7 and 8 types of RET rearrangements, respectively. Each fusion leads, in principle, to the same effect: The ret tyrosine kinase is uncoupled from its stringent physiological regulation by replacement of its 5' end and is aberrantly activated by the 5' parts of fused genes in thyrocytes that do not normally express ret tyrosine kinase. Ectopic ret expression, clonal expansion and early invasion are peculiar to the affected cells. The RET-fused gene is obviously decisive for modulating tumor development: ELE1/RET rearrangements lead to most rapid tumor progression and are related to the solid variant of PTC, in contrast to H4/RET rearrangements connected with papillary or follicular variants of PTC. CONCLUSIONS: Typical genetic aberrations are produced by radioiodine uptake in the juvenile thyroid gland. They act as determinants of phenotype, biology, and clinical course of radiation-induced papillary thyroid carcinomas. Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
98	DR	11338505	The paper reviews the data on the molecular structure of the protooncogene RET encoding for receptor-type protein kinase, on the mechanism of transformation of the normal protooncogene RET to a dominant transforming oncogene, and on RET mutations detected in patients with the MEN-2 syndrome. Moreover, it presents the authors' own findings. The familial medullary thyroid carcinoma burdened genealogy shows a new point mutation TCG(Ser)-->GCG(Ala) in codon 891, in the exon 15 of the protooncogene RET. This mutation was not detected in the chromosomes of healthy individuals. Analyzing the linkage with two known and two new polymorphic markers showed that there was a cisaggregation of informative polymorphic markers, phenotypic manifestation of the disease, and mutations in the genealogy in question. In the protooncogene RET, there were two new polymorphisms: G/A at position 24 in intron 14 and C/T in codon 836 (exon 14). The rate of the polymorphism encountered in codon 836 proved to be similar for the Russians and the Germans (0.96%), which was also seen for two earlier described polymorphisms in codon 691 (0.80 and 0.81, respectively) and in codon 904 (0.21 and 0.22). At the same time, there were statistically significant differences in the rates of intron 14 polymorphism (0.87 and 0.77, respectively). In a family having MEN 2, a proband displayed TGC-->CGC mutation in codon 634 of the gene RET in the heterozygous state. The mutation results in substitution of cysteine amino acid residue in the cysteine-rich extracellular domain of protein kinase encoded by the gene RET for arginine. The results of molecular analysis were used to confirm its clinical diagnosis and to indicate that effective care should be delivered in MEN 2a.
98	DR	11331212	OBJECTIVE: Both multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN 2A) and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC) are caused by germline mutations of the RET proto-oncogene. A broad spectrum of malignancy within and between families has been described with no clear genotype-phenotype correlation due to a scarcity of available data of large kindreds. DESIGN: Here we present the only known family with a germline mutation of codon 611 TGC to TTC (exon 10) in the RET proto-oncogene leading to a replacement of cysteine by phenylalanine (Cys611Phe or C611F). RESULTS: Twenty family members of this large kindred are gene carriers (GCs) and seven (5-13 years old) are potential carriers but have yet to be analysed. The clinical course of medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) in this family is characterized by a very slow evolution and progression of the tumour with no MTC-related death to date. Of 11 patients (30-69 years old) having undergone thyroidectomy six were classified as pT1, four as pT2 and one as C-cell hyperplasia according to the TNM system of the International Union Against Cancer. Due to cervical and mediastinal lymph node metastasis one patient (44 years old) had to be operated on a second time. The seven non-operated GCs of the fourth and fifth generation (17-26 years old) are yearly monitored with pentagastrin stimulation tests; one non-operated GC (43 years old) has refused any further investigations. Screening for primary hyperparathyroidism and phaeochromocytoma was negative in all cases. CONCLUSION: We suggest from these experiences that the general advice for thyroidectomy in early childhood should be modified in certain families, depending on genotype.
98	DR	11318605	Children exposed to radioactive iodine after the Chernobyl reactor accident frequently developed papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTC). The predominant molecular lesions in these tumors are rearrangements of the RET receptor tyrosine kinase gene. Various types of RET rearrangements have been described. More than 90% of PTC with RET rearrangement exhibit a PTC1 or PTC3 type of rearrangement with an inversion of the H4 or ELE1 gene, respectively, on chromosome 10. To obtain closer insight into the mechanisms underlying PTC3 inversions, we analyzed the genomic breakpoints of 22 reciprocal and 4 nonreciprocal ELE1 and RET rearrangements in 26 post-Chernobyl tumor samples. In contrast to previous assumptions, an accumulation of breakpoints at the two Alu elements in the ELE1 sequence was not observed. Instead, breakpoints are distributed in the affected introns of both genes without significant clustering. When compared to the corresponding wildtype sequences, the majority of breakpoints (92%) do not contain larger deletions or insertions. Most remarkably, at least one topoisomerase I site was found exactly at or in close vicinity to all breakpoints, indicating a potential role for this enzyme in the formation of DNA strand breaks and/or ELE1 and RET inversions. The presence of short regions of sequence homology (microhomologies) and short direct and inverted repeats at the majority of breakpoints furthermore indicates a nonhomologous DNA end-joining mechanism in the formation of chimeric ELE1/Ret and Ret/ELE1 genes. Copyright 2001 Academic Press.
98	DR	11295841	NA
98	NR	11295280	Well differentiated thyroid carcinomas provide a unique model of human, epithelial cell carcinogenesis. Their molecular characterization has allowed to associate specific genetic alterations to the two papillary and follicular histotypes which, despite their common origin, display different biological and clinical behaviors. A common mechanism of oncogenic activation has been observed in these tumors, based on the peculiar characteristic of thyroid epithelium to generate fusion transforming genes by chromosomal rearrangements. The reasons for this peculiar uniqueness of thyrocytes are not known, but a structural explanation, based on the spatial contiguity in the interphase nuclei of thyrocytes of the two fused genes and enzymatic features of these cells which render them apoptosis resistant to DNA damage, have been proposed to account for this behavior.
98	NR	11289752	AIM: The nosology of familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC) has been described as a distinct pathology, genetically determined and with autosomal dominant transmission with a gene penetrance of almost 100%. The diagnosis of this morbid condition can be made if at least four members of the same family are affected by calcitonin-secreting C-cell carcinoma. METHODS AND RESULTS: We report the analysis of a family in which FMTC was diagnosed between 1993 and 1998. Of the five patients we confirmed as being affected by FMTC, we were able to perform a prophylactic thyroidectomy in only one case. The high possibility of lymph-node metastasis at the time of clinical diagnosis (52-75%), and the high morbidity and radio-chemo-resistance to adjuvant therapies, indicate total thyroidectomy with central lymph-node dissection. CONCLUSION: It appears that preventive lymphadenectomy does not substantially improve survival, while pre-clinical diagnosis is of greater importance than surgery in improving survival and preventing recurrence. Total preventive thyroidectomy has been recommended in all carriers of ret genetic defects, even in families at risk with mutations of the 618 or 620 codon, because the penetrance of FMTC approaches 100%, and a 100% accordance between presence of the disease and gene carrier status is reported. This procedure would therefore represent the only possibility of achieving a 100% cure in subjects affected by familial medullary thyroid carcinoma. Copyright Harcourt Publishers Limited.
98	DR	11289739	Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid (MTC) is a rare tumour derived from thyroid C cells with serum calcitonin as a specific and sensitive marker. MTC is inherited in 25% of cases, with an autosomal dominant transmission, age-related penetrance and variable expressivity. MTC is an obligatory component of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2), which comprises three well defined syndromes: MEN2A, which may be associated with pheochromocytoma and/or hyperparathyroidism; the much rarer MEN2B, which occurs early and is accompanied by developmental abnormalities; while in contrast, familial MTC (FMTC) is not associated with any endocrinopathy. The RET proto-oncogene is the causative gene of the MEN2 syndromes and mutations in this gene are found in >90% of inherited cases, allowing easier and more reliable family screening than pentagastrin stimulation tests. Nevertheless, the correlation between the genotype and the different clinical phenotypes is not perfect. The prognosis of MTC depends on its staging at presentation, and the early appearance of cervical lymph node metastases emphasizes the need for extensive surgery, although many patients still do not normalize calcitonin levels post-operatively, and they remain a challenge for the further management. Copyright 2000 Harcourt Publishers Ltd.
98	DR	11279608	Somatic mutations in the proto-oncogene RET are found in 25% to 80% of sporadic medullary thyroid carcinomas (MTCs). The significance of somatic RET mutation in MTC initiation and progression, however, remains unknown. Like RET, TRK is a neurotrophic receptor tyrosine kinase. Immunostaining has shown that only a subset of normal C cells expresses Trk family receptors, but in C-cell hyperplasia, they consistently express NTRK2, with variable expression of NTRK1 and NTRK3. In later stages of MTC, NTRK2 expression was reduced while NTRK3 expression was increased. In the context of these data, we sought to determine whether sequence variants in NTRK2 and NTRK3 are responsible for these differences in protein expression. We determined the genomic structure of NTRK2 and found that it consists of at least 17 exons varying in size from 36 to 306 bp. Mutation analysis of sporadic MTC did not reveal any sequence variants in NTRK2 but did reveal 3 variants in NTRK3, c.573C >T (N191N, exon 5), c.678T > C (N226N, exon 6) and c.1488C > G (A496A, exon 12) occurring among 19 chromosomes (31%), 1 chromosome (2%) and 24 chromosomes (39%), respectively. Corresponding germline also harbored these variants. There was a trend toward excess association of the NTRK3 variant c.1488C > G (A496A) in cases (24/62 chromosomes, 39%) compared to controls (18/62, 29%), but this difference did not reach significance (p > 0.05). The remaining 2 NTRK3 variants occurred with similar frequencies between MTC cases and population-matched controls (19 vs. 17 and 1 vs. 0, p > 0.05). We conclude that sequence variants in NTRK2 and NTRK3 are not likely to be responsible for large differences in expression at the protein level, but we cannot exclude very low penetrance effects. Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
98	DR	11280716	Germline mutations of the RET proto-oncogene cause three different cancer syndromes: multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN 2A), multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B (MEN 2B) and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC). In the absence of biochemical and/or clinical evidence of pheochromocytoma and hyperparathyroidism, patients with MEN 2A disease display the same phenotype of FMTC disease, although prognosis and clinical management in both affected and unaffected familial members are quite different. We studied a family with hereditary MTC, whose proband was referred to us because of enlarged cervical nodes and increased calcitonin serum levels 28 years after the total thyroidectomy for MTC. Cervical node dissection was carried out and subsequently the presence of MTC metastasis was histologically confirmed. A RET genomic mutation at codon 634 (TGC-->TTC) was identified in the proband and in seven out of 19 familial members studied. Accordingly, a hereditary disease was suggested. However, the strong association of RET mutation at codon 634 with the presence of pheochromocytoma in MEN 2 disease suggested a more rigorous management in all gene carriers. Indeed, during the follow-up pheochromocytoma was subsequently identified in the proband. This finding suggests that all families with a pedigree suggestive of FMTC should be regarded at risk from MEN 2A disease, at least when a critical mutation in the RET cysteine domain is detected.
98	PR	11272104	NA
98	DR	11269881	NA
98	DR	11266533	The gene responsible for MEN-2, the ret proto-ocogene, has elucidated mechanisms of endocrine tumorigenesis. Activating mutations of this transmembrane tyrosine kinase receptor represent the first known example of an inherited oncogene. This knowledge has altered our approach to affected patients by allowing in utero screening and prophylactic thyroidectomy rather than provocative testing and morphologic analysis of C cell hyperplasia--will it result in eradication of medullary carcinoma of thyroid? The lessons from Chernobyl taught us how radiation can induce chromosomal rearrangements that involve the same gene. This has led to a better understanding of papillary thyroid carcinoma and provides a novel immunohistochemical marker that widens our diagnostic armamentarium.
98	DR	11250764	OBJECTIVE: To study the pattern of multiple endocrine neoplasia type IIA (MEN IIA) and describe the clinical features and results of genetic testing and treatment in 21 members of the first reported family with MEN IIA in Qatar. METHODS: After identification of the proband, we screened all her family members (21 members) with genetic testing for the RET proto-oncogene mutation. Those subjects with the mutation were further assessed for pheochromocytoma by measurement of the 24-hour urinary vanillylmandelic acid, metanephrines, and catecholamines, and those with high levels underwent a metaiodobenzylguanidine scan and adrenalectomy. The serum calcium was measured in a effort to detect hyperparathyroidism. Those family members who had the mutation and were eligible for surgical treatment underwent total thyroidectomy and central compartment dissection. In those patients with high postoperative calcitonin levels, residual disease was sought with radiologic imaging, and follow-up was done with pentagastrin stimulation tests. RESULTS: Of the 21 family members screened, 10 had the RET proto-oncogene mutation (codon 634, TGC->GGC) (5 females and 5 males; 6 adults and 4 children). All the adults had bilateral medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC); four of them had lymph node metastatic lesions, and one had metastatic involvement of the liver. Two adults had pheochromocytomas. Two family members were reported to have parathyroid hyperplasia, although both were normocalcemic. CONCLUSION: This family with MEN IIA showed classic mendelian autosomal dominant inheritance. All adult patients had MTC, two had pheochromocytomas, and two had parathyroid hyperplasia. Although one child had a high stimulated calcitonin level, the histopathologic findings were normal; another child with high stimulated calcitonin levels showed C-cell hyperplasia on histopathologic examination.
98	DR	11245446	Mutations of the Ret receptor tyrosine kinase are responsible for inheritance of multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN2A and MEN2B) and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma syndromes. Although several familial medullary thyroid carcinoma and most MEN2A mutations involve substitutions of extracellular cysteine residues, in most MEN2B cases there is a methionine-to-threonine substitution at position 918 (M918T) of the Ret kinase domain. The mechanism by which the MEN2B mutation converts Ret into a potent oncogene is poorly understood. Both MEN2A and MEN2B oncoproteins exert constitutive activation of the kinase. However, the highly aggressive MEN2B phenotype is not supported by higher levels of Ret-MEN2B kinase activity compared with Ret-MEN2A. It has been proposed that Ret-MEN2B is more than just an activated Ret kinase and that the M918T mutation, by targeting the kinase domain of Ret, might alter Ret substrate specificity, thus affecting Ret autophosphorylation sites and the ability of Ret to phosphorylate intracellular substrates. We show that the Ret-MEN2B mutation causes specific potentiated phosphorylation of tyrosine 1062 (Y1062) compared with Ret-MEN2A. Phosphorylated Y1062 is part of a Ret multiple effector docking site that mediates recruitment of the Shc adapter and of phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K). Accordingly, we show that Ret-MEN2B is more active than Ret-MEN2A in associating with She and in causing constitutive activation of the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase and PI3K/Akt cascades. We conclude that the MEN2B mutation specifically potentiates the ability of Ret to autophosphorylate Y1062 and consequently to couple to the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase and the PI3K/Akt pathways. The more efficient triggering of these pathways may account for the difference between MEN2A and MEN2B syndromes.
98	DR	11241313	We have determined the frequency of 918 RET proto-oncogene mutations (ATG-->ACG) in primary MTC tumors and metastases and correlated the presence or absence of this mutation with the clinical outcome of patients suffering from sporadic medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC). A total of 197 samples, consisting of both primary tumors and lymph node metastases from 34 patients with sporadic MTC, were collected for PCR analysis of the RET 918 mutation. In 75 of the samples (38%), codon 918 (ATG-->ACG) mutations could be detected. The mutations showed a heterogeneous distribution: 21/34 patients (62%) had mutations in at least 1 tumor sample, and in 13 patients (38%) the mutation was present in all examined samples. Patients were considered 918mt when at least 1 tumor sample showed the RET 918 mutation. These 918mt and 918 wild-type (918wt) patients did not differ significantly concerning sex, age at diagnosis, TNM stage at diagnosis, number of examined tumor samples or follow-up time. However, 918mt patients showed more aggressive development of distant metastases during follow-up (p = 0.032, Fisher's exact test) with decreased metastases-free survival (p < 0.005, log-rank test). Furthermore, 918mt patients had a significantly lower survival rate than 918wt patients (p = 0.048, log-rank test). These data show that the RET codon 918 mutation has a prognostic impact on patients with sporadic MTC which may influence follow-up treatment. Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
98	DR	11238493	In hereditary medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), few genotype-phenotype correlations have been established. RET genotypes (exons 10, 11, 13, and 14) of 63 patients with hereditary MTC (from November 1994 to October 1999) were correlated with age at diagnosis, sex, the TNM system, and basal calcitonin levels. Mutations in exons 10, 11, 13, and 14 were demonstrated in 22% (14 of 63), 54% (34 of 63), 21% (13 of 63), and 3% (2 of 63). The median ages at diagnosis differed significantly (38, 27, 52, and 62 yr; P = 0.003). When grouped by cysteine codons (exons 10 and 11 vs. exons 13 and 14), this difference became even more evident (30 vs. 56 yr; P = 0.001). Apart from age at diagnosis, no other significant associations were noted. Based hereon, three MTC risk groups were devised according to genotype: a high risk group (codons 634 and 618) with the youngest ages of 3 and 7 yr at diagnosis; an intermediate risk group (codons 790, 620, and 611) with ages of 12, 34, and 42 yr; and a low risk group (codons 768 and 804) with ages of 47 and 60 yr, respectively. Age at diagnosis was unrelated to specific nucleotide and amino acid exchange within each codon. The current data demonstrate that there is a significant genotype-phenotype correlation, allowing for a more individualized approach to the timing and extent of prophylactic surgery.
98	PR	11237284	Thyroid nodule genesis may be considered as an amplification of thyroid heterogeneity due to genetic and/or epigenetic mechanisms. We classified the thyroid nodules in five types with distinct histological features: hyperplastic, neoplastic, colloid, cystic and thyroiditic nodules. Hyperplastic: Thyrocyte proliferation is under the control of TSH but several other paracrine and autocrine factors are secreted by follicular cells, the stromal apparatus and the lymphocytes, which are implicated in initiation and perpetuation of thyroid hyperplasia. Growth occurs mainly through TSHR, cAMP and PKA. Constitutive cAMP overproduction has been shown to be due to point mutation of the TSHR or Gs protein, producing overgrowth and hyperfunction. Neoplastic: Several activated oncogenes have been identified in thyroid malignancies. Oncogenes relevant to the thyroid carcinogenesis are: mutated TSHR and gsp (constitutive activation of cAMP); TRK (receptor for NGF); RET/PTC (phosphorylation of tyrosine kinase receptor)--an isoform of this oncogene is induced by radiation: ras (it encodes Gs proteins transducing mitogenic signals); and c-MET (receptor for hepatocyte growth factor). The evolution of a differentiated thyroid cancer towards an undifferentiated cancer is due to a mutation of a family of proteins (i.e., p53), which acts as a brake, preventing the genomic instability of cancer. It is suggested that a tumor initiates by RET or ras and possibly progresses--as a result of additional mutations and by p53 mutation--to anaplastic carcinoma. Colloid: Flattening of the epithelium and dilatation of follicles containing viscous material--made up by a concentrated solution of thyroglobulin (hTg)--is the characteristic of the colloid nodule. A defect of intraluminal reabsorption of hTg has been suggested but not proven. Experimentally, a load of iodine is able to change thyroid hyperplasia to a colloid feature; however, a load of iodine is rarely found in the clinical history of patients. A new clue to the pathogenesis comes from the finding that a relevant part of the colloid (10-20%) is made up of insoluble globules, where hTg is compacted in a polymeric form. It is suggested that stocking hTg into globules is defective in colloid nodules, leading to enormous enlargement of the follicle. Cystic: It is estimated that between 15 and 40% of thyroid nodules are partly or entirely cystic. The 'true cyst' is rare; most of the so-called cystic nodules are 'pseudocysts', which follow necrosis and colliquation. Necrosis issues as an imbalance between growth and the precisely regulated process of angiogenesis. More recently, the VEGF/VPF has been found to be at the origin of recent and recurrent cysts. Immunotoxic and apoptotic mechanisms have also been suggested. Chemical analysis of cystic fluid showed a 'denatured' and 'serum-like' pattern suggesting different mechanisms in the pathogenesis of the pseudocystic thyroid nodules. Thyroiditic: Nodular lymphocytic thyroiditis (NLT) includes two different entities: 1) lymphocyte thyroiditis growing as a nodule in a hyperplastic or normal gland, and 2) lymphocyte thyroiditis associated in the same nodule with other nodular diseases of the thyroid: papillary thyroid carcinoma and lymphoma have been found to be associated to chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis.
98	DR	11232035	Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) is a rare extracolonic manifestation of familial adenomatous polyposis, determined by germline mutations of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. The aim of this study was to assess the presence of loss of heterozygosity of APC in the thyroid tumoral tissue. Specimens from six female patients, aged 20-36, were analyzed for germline and somatic mutations of the APC gene by restriction enzyme analysis and sequence analysis. Five of the six also had analysis for ret/PTC, a chimeric gene, the activation of which is restricted to papillary TC. Because a previous study showed that germline mutations in familial adenomatous polyposis-associated thyroid carcinoma were located between codons 140 and 1513, the search for somatic mutations of the APC gene was restricted to this genomic area. Three of the six patients, belonging to the same kindred, had a germline mutation at codon 1061. The remaining three, one per kindred, had germline mutations at codons 1061, 1061, and 1309, respectively. None of the six patients had loss of heterozygosity for APC or somatic mutation in the explored genomic area (codon 545 and codons 1061-1678). Four of five had activation of ret/PTC in the thyroid tumoral tissue, as ret/PTC1 isoform. Either APC has a tissue-specific dominant effect in the thyroid gland or the germline mutation confers a generic susceptibility to cancer development, but other factors (sex-related factors, environmental radiation, modifier genes) are also required for TC development. This usually involves ret/PTC activation, suggesting a possible cooperation between altered function of APC and gain of function of ret.
98	DR	11230481	PURPOSE: The study was undertaken to evaluate the frequency of inherited medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) among patients with apparent sporadic disease. A stepwise algorithm was used depending on clinical indices and the age of patient at MTC diagnosis. PATIENTS AND METHODS: One hundred sixteen patients with MTC verified by postoperative pathologic examination were subjected to genetic analysis of RET exons 10, 11, 13, 14, and 16 by means of polymerase chain reaction, restriction endonuclease digestion, and DNA sequencing. RESULTS: Among 116 apparent sporadic MTC patients, we identified eleven (9.5%) RET germline mutation carriers. Seven of these (6.0%) were found by routine analysis (exons 10 and 11). The frequency of inherited disease among patients younger than 45 years at diagnosis was 10.2% by analysis of typical mutations in exons 10 and 11. Extended genetic analysis (sequencing of exons 11, 13, 14, and 16) yielded 6.1% additional diagnoses, giving a risk of 16.3% in this age group. One previously unreported mutation in exon 11 affected codon 649 (TCG>TTG, Ser>Leu). In the true sporadic MTC patients younger than 30 years at diagnosis, frequencies of 36% and 4.5% in polymorphic variants L769L and S836S, respectively, were observed. The frequency for L769L was higher than in older patients (P <.05). CONCLUSION: The frequency of inherited disease among apparent sporadic medullary thyroid carcinoma patients is close to 10% in the Polish population of MTC patients. The extended analysis of all known RET proto-oncogene mutation sites is obligatory in patients younger than 45 years at diagnosis, but we also see the need to analyze the impact of rarer mutations in older patients.
98	DR	11227733	A case of a patient with an uncommon thyroid carcinoma, showing histological and immunohistochemical features of both follicular and parafollicular cells is described. Somatic point mutation (ATG to ACG heterozygotic mutation at codon 918) of the RET proto-oncogene was detected in tumor tissue, as confirmed by immunohistochemical expression of RET oncoprotein. Our findings suggest that constitutive RET proto-oncogene activation may be involved in the development of mixed medullary-follicular thyroid carcinoma.
98	DR	11205236	The multiple endocrine neoplasia syndromes are divided into two categories: MEN type I and MEN type II. The MEN type II syndrome is further divided into MEN IIa and MEN IIb. The syndromes are characterized by benign and malignant changes in two or more endocrine organs, as well as incidental changes in nervous, muscular and connective tissue. Two main forms can be distinguished: the MEN-I syndrome with hyperplasia of the parathyroid gland, accompanied by islet cell tumor and pituitary adenoma; the MEN-II syndrome with medullary thyroid carcinoma in combination with bilateral pheochromocytoma and hyperplasia of the parathyroid gland (MEN IIa), while type IIb is characterized by the additional appearance of neurocutaneous manifestations without primary hyperparathyroidism. Characteristics shared by these syndromes include the involved cell type, most of the tumors are composed of one or more specific polypeptide- and biogenic amine-producing cell types (APUD--amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation). The second characteristic is the increased incidence in certain families. The hereditary component is autosomal dominant with variable expression but high penetrance. Mechanisms of tumorigenesis differ in these syndromes. While MEN I is caused by an inherited mutation of a tumor suppressor gene, menin, located on the long arm of chromosome 11, MEN II is caused by activation of the RET proto-oncogene. We have reported the case of a young man exhibiting bilateral pheochromocytoma. In addition, the patient showed mild primary hyperparathyroidism and marfanoid habitus, all these stigmata usually being part of the MEN-II syndrome. Although this described patient showed a phenotypic mixture of the MEN-IIa and MEN-IIb syndrome, the genetic analysis for MEN II and von-Hippel-Lindau gene did not reveal any pathologic mutations, the endocrine disorders described here are not related to multiple endocrine neoplasia syndromes.
98	DR	11194546	Since the association of RET proto-oncogene mutations and medullary thyroid carcinoma in children there has been much discussion regarding timing of surgery. Our study group was formed from a brother and sister (8 and 5) and 3 brothers (9, 13, 16) selected on the basis of a positive family history for thyroid medullary carcinoma. Histological examinations of the thyroidectomy specimens showed that the 8- and 9-year old had microinvasive carcinoma and the remaining three had C-cell hyperplasia. Our recommendation is for prophylactic thyroidectomy for children with RET proto oncogene mutations at an early age, clearly before age 5.
98	DR	11187163	NA
98	NR	11183150	NA
98	NR	11174835	OBJECTIVE: The aim of this prospective study is to update our knowledge of the chronology of pheochromocytoma occurrence in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2), and to better manage MEN 2 patients after the genetic diagnosis. DESIGN: Eighty-seven non-index gene carrier MEN 2 patients were included in this prospective study: 84 patients with MEN 2A (from 52 families) and 3 with MEN 2B (from 3 families). METHODS: Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) was diagnosed by measuring plasma calcitonin in basal conditions or after pentagastrin stimulation. The search for pheochromocytoma consisted of clinical evaluation, 24 h determination of urinary catecholamines and adrenal imaging. The mean age at genetic diagnosis of MEN 2 was 14.0+/-7.0 years, the mean duration for the follow-up was 7.6+/-2.8 years. RESULTS: All 87 patients had a MTC detected at the same time as the genetic diagnosis was made. Urinary catecholamine measurements led to the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma and a combination of imaging techniques enabled the correct localization of both unilateral or bilateral adrenal involvement. Pheochromocytoma was detected simultaneously with MTC in only seven patients, and seven others were detected throughout the follow-up. Of the 14 patients with pheochromocytoma, 11 had bilateral involvement: nine were initially bilateral and two became so during follow-up. CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that in MEN 2, MTC is the lesion which appears earliest. Pheochromocytoma develops later during the evolution of the disease, and necessitates regular clinical and biological monitoring throughout follow-up. Determination of urinary and/or plasma catecholamines and metanephrines should be performed to detect pheochromocytoma. Imaging techniques lead to the detection of both unilateral and bilateral pheochromocytoma, thus making video-assisted laparoscopic adrenalectomy possible.
98	DR	11165748	Four types of thyroid cancer comprise more than 98% of all thyroid malignancies. Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) may have a very benign course while undifferentiated thyroid carcinoma (UTC) belongs to the most aggressive human malignancies. A variety of genes have been identified to be involved in the pathogenesis of thyroid carcinoma. Somatic Ras mutations seem to be an early event and are frequently found in follicular thyroid carcinomas. Somatic rearrangements of RET and TRK are almost exclusively found in PTC and may be found in early stages. Germline RET missense mutations lead to hereditary medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC). In contrast, the significance of somatic RET mutations in sporadic MTC is unknown. p53 seems to play a crucial role in the dedifferentiation process of thyroid carcinoma. The precise role of PTEN remains to be elucidated. The only clearly identified exogenous factor that may lead to thyroid carcinoma (mainly PTC) is radiation. Of interest, radiation is capable to induce RET rearrangements. In general, early diagnosis is mandatory to enable the chance of cure. Surgery is the treatment of choice. Depending on the tumour type, surgery in combination with either radioiodine, external radiation or chemotherapy often enables the control of local tumour burden. In MTC and UTC, once thyroid cancer is spread to distant organs, efficacious therapeutic agents are almost non-existing. However, our growing knowledge of genes involved in thyroidal oncogenesis may contribute to the development of more effective treatment modalities. Some preliminary data on gene therapy are quite promising.
98	NR	11156410	Pheochromocytomas are tumors of the adrenal medulla originating in the chromaffin cells derived from the neural crest. Ten % of these tumors are associated with the familial cancer syndromes multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2, von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL), and rarely, neurofibromatosis type 1, in which germ-line mutations have been identified in RET, VHL, and NF1, respectively. In both the sporadic and familial form of pheochromocytoma, allelic loss at 1p, 3p, 17p, and 22q has been reported, yet the molecular pathogenesis of these tumors is largely unknown. Allelic loss at chromosome 1p has also been reported in other endocrine tumors, such as medullary thyroid cancer and tumors of the parathyroid gland, as well as in tumors of neural crest origin including neuroblastoma and malignant melanoma. In this study, we performed fine structure mapping of deletions at chromosome 1p in familial and sporadic pheochromocytomas to identify discrete regions likely housing tumor suppressor genes involved in the development of these tumors. Ten microsatellite markers spanning a region of approximately 70 cM (1pter to 1p34.3) were used to screen 20 pheochromocytomas from 19 unrelated patients for loss of heterozygosity (LOH). LOH was detected at five or more loci in 8 of 13 (61%) sporadic samples and at five or more loci in four of five (80%) tumor samples from patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2. No LOH at 1p was detected in pheochromocytomas from two VHL patients. Analysis of the combined sporadic and familial tumor data suggested three possible regions of common somatic loss, designated as PC1 (D1S243 to D1S244), PC2 (D1S228 to D1S507), and PC3 (D1S507 toward the centromere). We propose that chromosome 1p may be the site of at least three putative tumor suppressor loci involved in the tumorigenesis of pheochromocytomas. At least one of these loci, PC2 spanning an interval of <3.8 cM, is likely to have a broader role in the development of endocrine malignancies.
98	DR	11156407	As part of ongoing studies on the RET rearrangement frequency in children with papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) after their exposure to radioactive iodine after the Chernobyl reactor accident, new methods for the detection of novel types of RET rearrangements are being developed. In this study, an improved reverse transcription-PCR strategy is used successfully to identify a new type of RET rearrangement. This rearrangement is designated PTC8 and the involved RET-fused gene (RFG) as RFG8. The identification of two reciprocal transcripts coding for the RFG8/RET and RET/RFG8 fusions suggests that the PTC8 rearrangement results from a balanced chromosomal translocation. With a view to clarify its role in tumor induction, we compared the fusion products with those of previously described RET rearrangements. We therefore sequenced and characterized the RFG8 cDNA, which showed no significant similarity to any functional protein described as yet. RFG8 is located on chromosome 18q21-22 and is expressed ubiquitously. Bioinformatic analysis predicts with a high probability that the corresponding rfg8 protein is located in the cytoplasm and is involved putatively in intracellular transport processes. Furthermore, we identified coiled-coil structures upstream of the breakpoint with one of the coiled-coils showing dimerization capability. Thus the rfg8/ret fusion protein exhibits structures for oncogenic activation that are similar to those observed in previously described RET fusions.
98	NR	11121408	Protein-tyrosine-phosphatases (PTPs), in conjunction with protein-tyrosine kinases, play essential regulatory roles in diverse cellular activities by modulating the phosphorylation state of target proteins. Leukocyte common antigen-related (LAR) protein is a widely expressed receptor-type protein-tyrosine-phosphatase that is implicated in the regulation of intracellular signaling triggered by both cell adhesion and peptide growth factors. The gene for LAR is localized to human chromosome 1p32, a region frequently deleted in tumors of neuroectodermal origin, including neuroblastoma, pheochromocytoma, and medullary thyroid carcinoma. On the other hand, the RET gene codes for a transmembrane tyrosine kinase and is responsible for the development of multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) 2A and 2B. To explore the potential role of LAR in RET tyrosine kinase activity and RET-induced signal transduction, we cotransfected LAR and RET with a MEN2A or MEN2B mutation (designated RET-MEN2A or RET-MEN2B) into the NIH 3T3 cell line. Here we show that LAR reduces the constitutive tyrosine autophosphorylation and kinase activity of RET-MEN2A but not RET-MEN2B, accompanying a significant decrease of phosphorylation of phospholipase Cgamma, AKT, and ERK1/2. Interestingly, LAR expression significantly decreased the levels of disulfide-linked RET-MEN2A dimerization. Moreover, reduced oncogenic activity of RET-MEN2A by overexpression of LAR was observed both by an in vitro colony formation assay and by in vivo tumorigenicity in scid mice. These results thus suggest that LAR may contribute to deactivation of the RET-MEN2A mutant protein and reduction of its oncogenic activity in vivo.
98	DR	11130252	In our clinic 19615 patients were operated over 25 years on for goiter. Malignant thyroid neoplasms were found in 1049 (5.3%) patients including 875 (83.4%) women and 174 (16.6%) men. Sixty two adult patients (42 women and 20 men were operated on for medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC). Thyroid cancer was diagnosed in this group pre or intraoperatively in 44 (71%) patients and postoperatively, on histologic examination, in 18 (29%) patients. These patients were reoperated. Radical operations (total thyroidectomy with regional lymph node removal) were conducted in 43 (69.3%) patients and palliative ones in 19 (30.7%) patients. After MTC surgery, MEN 2A (MTC and an adrenal tumor) were diagnosed by means of imaging techniques (USG, CT) in 6 (9.7%) patients. All adrenal tumors were unilateral. Five of these patients were operated, and pheochromocytoma was confirmed by histopathologic examination. Two years after the MTC operation, 1 women was lost to follow-up. After a year, she was admitted to hospital for severe hypertension and died of cerebral hemorrhagia. Pheochromocytoma was revealed by autopsy. All patients were treated complementarily after the MTC operation. Different combinations of teleradiotherapy, chemotherapy and substitutive doses of levothyroxine were used. Ten (23.2%) of 43 patients operated radically were reoperated 1-3 years after the first operation due to loco-regional tumor recurrence. Radical reoperations were performed in 4 patients, and palliative ones in 6. Over a 0.5-23-year follow-up period, 26 (41.9%) patients died, including 20 of cancer, and 6 of other reasons. Four out of 36 living patients have clinical or biochemical symptoms of neoplastic disease. The follow-up period of MEN 2 patients operated on ranged from 1 to 6 years. Up to now, no tumor in the second adrenal gland has been diagnosed in any of these patients. Genetic (molecular) tests performed in 31 out of 36 living patients revealed mutations of RET gene in 4 (12.9%).
98	NR	11126359	Genetic analysis of human papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTC) has revealed unique chromosomal translocations that form oncogenic fusion proteins and promote thyroid tumorigenesis in up to 60% of tumors examined. Although, the majority of thyroid specific translocations involve the growth factor receptor c-RET, variant rearrangements of the receptor for nerve growth factor, NTRK1 have also been described. One such translocation, TRK-T1, forms a fusion protein composed of the carboxyl terminal tyrosine kinase domain of NTRK1 and the amino terminal portion of TPR (Translocated Promoter Region). To determine if TRK-T1 expression can cause thyroid cancer in vivo, we developed transgenic mice that express the human TRK-T1 fusion protein in the thyroid. Immunohistochemical analysis of TRK-T1 transgenic mouse thyroids revealed TRK-T1 staining within the thyroid follicular epithelium. In contrast to nontransgenic littermates, 54% of transgenic mice developed thyroid abnormalities that included follicular hyperplasia and papillary carcinoma. Furthermore, all transgenic mice examined greater than 7 months of age developed thyroid hyperplasia and/or carcinoma. These data support the conclusion that TRK-T1 is oncogenic in vivo and contributes to the neoplastic transformation of the thyroid.
98	NR	11116144	Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) family ligands signal through receptor complex consisting of a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-linked GDNF family receptor (GFR) alpha subunit and the transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase RET. The inherited cancer syndrome multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2), associated with different mutations in RET, is characterized by medullary thyroid carcinoma. GDNF signals via GFRalpha1, neurturin via GFRalpha2, artemin via GFRalpha3, whereas the mammalian GFRalpha receptor for persephin (PSPN) is unknown. Here we characterize the human GFRalpha4 as the ligand-binding subunit required together with RET for PSPN signaling. Human and mouse GFRalpha4 lack the first Cys-rich domain characteristic of other GFRalpha receptors. Unlabeled PSPN displaces (125)I-PSPN from GFRA4-transfected cells, which express endogenous Ret. PSPN can be specifically cross-linked to mammalian GFRalpha4 and Ret, and is able to promote autophosphorylation of Ret in GFRA4-transfected cells. PSPN, but not other GDNF family ligands, promotes the survival of cultured sympathetic neurons microinjected with GFRA4. We identified different splice forms of human GFRA4 mRNA encoding for two glycosylphosphatidylinositol-linked and one putative soluble isoform that were predominantly expressed in the thyroid gland. Overlapping expression of RET and GFRA4 but not other GFRA mRNAs in normal and malignant thyroid medullary cells suggests that GFRalpha4 may restrict the MEN2 syndrome to these cells.
98	DR	11114739	The activation of the RET proto-oncogene contributes to the development of human cancers in two different ways. Somatic rearrangements of RET with a variety of activating genes, which contribute to unscheduled expression and constitutive dimerization of the chimeric RET/PTC oncoproteins in thyroid follicular cells, are frequently found in radiation-induced papillary thyroid carcinomas. Germ-line mutations, mainly point mutations, that lead to constitutive activation of RET tyrosine kinase activity are responsible for the development of the inherited cancer syndrome, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2. There appears to be a correlation between specific types of RET mutation and clinical phenotypes of the cancers involved. The biological effects and the signaling pathways induced by different forms of RET activation have been investigated in a variety of cultured cells as well as in genetically engineered animal models. The identification of RET mutations in most MEN 2 families (95%) has translated into improved care for MEN 2 patients. However, further investigation of the signaling pathways contributing to tumorigenesis in relevant tissues will eventually help us to develop novel strategies to prevent or to treat human papillary thyroid carcinomas, MEN 2 disease, as well as the sporadic cancers relevant to MEN 2 disease.
98	DR	11114642	BACKGROUND: Mutations of the RET proto-oncogene co-segregate with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A. A rare sequence abnormality at codon 804 (c804) has been reported in 6 kindreds and linked to mild C-cell disease, which raises the question of the appropriateness of thyroidectomy in childhood. The purpose of this study was to (1) report the clinical correlates of 5 additional c804 kindreds, and (2) clarify therapeutic options in children. METHODS: Thirty-eight members from five c804 kindreds underwent genetic analysis. Biochemical, operative, and pathology reports were reviewed. RESULTS: Twenty-three gene carriers were identified, of whom 14 had thyroidectomy. Medullary thyroid carcinoma was found in 7 patients (aged 5-56 years), C-cell hyperplasia in 6 patients (aged 13-40 years), and normal histology in a single patient (aged 27 years). One patient with medullary thyroid carcinoma died of metastases (aged 12 years). Nine of the 23 gene carriers delayed operation, 4 of whom had calcitonin testing. Three of the 4 patients had abnormal calcitonin levels and a single patient was negative (aged 40 years). Of the remaining 9 patients, 2 await thyroidectomy, and 3 have refused evaluation. CONCLUSIONS: Penetrance of the c804 mutation is highly variable. Medullary thyroid carcinoma associated with this genotype has aggressive potential. Prophylactic thyroidectomy in childhood is a viable approach.
98	DR	11073534	Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) is an inherited cancer syndrome characterised by medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), with or without phaeochromocytoma and hyperparathyroidism. MEN 2 is unusual among cancer syndromes as it is caused by activation of a cellular oncogene, RET. Germline mutations in the gene encoding the RET receptor tyrosine kinase are found in the vast majority of MEN 2 patients and somatic RET mutations are found in a subset of sporadic MTC. Further, there are strong associations of RET mutation genotype and disease phenotype in MEN 2 which have led to predictions of tissue specific requirements and sensitivities to RET activity. Our ability to identify genetically, with high accuracy, subjects with MEN 2 has revolutionised our ability to diagnose, predict, and manage this disease. In the past few years, studies of RET and its normal ligand and downstream interactions and the signalling pathways it activates have clarified our understanding of the roles played by RET in normal cell survival, proliferation, and differentiation, as well as in disease. Here, we review the current knowledge of the normal functions of RET and the effects of mutations of this gene in tumorigenesis and in normal development.
98	DR	11061555	Point mutations of the RET receptor tyrosine kinase are responsible for the inheritance of multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 2 syndromes and are also present in a fraction of sporadic medullary thyroid carcinomas. Somatic rearrangements of the RET gene generating the chimeric RET/papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) oncogenes are the predominant molecular lesions associated with papillary carcinoma, the most frequent thyroid malignancy in humans. Oncogenic mutations cause constitutive activation of the kinase function of RET, which, in turn, results in the autophosphorylation of RET tyrosine residues critical for signaling. In vitro kinase assays previously revealed six putative RET autophosphorylation sites. The aim of the present study was to assess the phosphorylation of two such residues, tyrosines 1015 and 1062 (Y1015 and Y1062), in the in vivo signaling of RET and RET-derived oncogenes. Using phosphorylated RET-specific antibodies, we demonstrate that both Y1015 and Y1062 are rapidly phosphorylated upon ligand triggering of RET. Moreover, regardless of the nature of the underlying activating mutation, the concomitant phosphorylation of Y1015 and Y1062 is a common feature of the various oncogenic RET products (MEN2A, MEN2B, and PTC). This study shows that Ab-pY1062 is a useful tool with which to detect activated RET in human tumor cells and surgical samples. Finally, the microinjection of Ab-pY1062 antibodies into living cells demonstrates that Ret/PTC1 signaling is required to maintain the mitogenesis of a human carcinoma cell line expressing the Ret/PTC1 oncoprotein.
98	DR	11038208	Compared to hereditary medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), sporadic MTC tends to be unicentric and confined to one lobe. Patients with sporadic MTC usually undergo total thyroidectomy because of a possible hereditary or bilateral process. We evaluated the usefulness of germline RET oncogene mutation analysis in surgery for apparently sporadic MTC and performed unilateral surgery on patients without detectable mutation. In 36 patients with a preoperative diagnosis of apparently sporadic MTC, we performed germline RET oncogene mutation analyses: before surgery in 8 recent patients and after surgery in 28 who had been treated before 1996. Of the latter, 5 had bilateral MTC. DNA samples were extracted from their peripheral blood, and the polymerase chain reaction products of the RET proto-oncogene were analyzed using single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis and the direct sequencing methods. Before 1996 we often performed total thyroidectomy but changed to hemithyroidectomy thereafter, except in one patient with associated Graves' ophthalmopathy. Our minimal standard practice included systematic central and ipsilateral neck dissection. The outcome was assessed in terms of gastrin- and calcium-stimulated plasma calcitonin levels. Germline RET mutations were found in six patients. Five of these patients had bilateral MTC, whereas all 30 patients without mutation had unilateral disease. Hemithyroidectomy in seven of our recent patients resulted in normalization of plasma calcitonin levels in all, although four were found to have microscopic lymph node involvement. In conclusion, hemithyroidectomy with systematic central and ipsilateral neck dissection is an appropriate procedure for patients with sporadic MTC without detectable germline RET mutations.
98	DR	11037345	C-cell hyperplasia (CCH) and medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) in patients affected by germline mutations of the RET oncogene represent an exceptional opportunity to study the regulation of proliferation and apoptosis during tumour initiation and progression. In 56 specimens [CCH, n=1; MTC with CCH, n=26; MTC, n=20; lymph-node metastasis (LNM), n=9] from 46 patients [multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2a (MEN2a), n=24; MEN2b, n=2; familiar MTC (FMTC), n=4; sporadic MTC, n-16] and 3 cases of non-neoplastic CCH, proliferation activity (MIB1), the rate of apoptosis [dUTP nick end labelling (TUNEL)] and expression of p53, bcl-2, bcl-x and bax were investigated and compared with clinical data. In MEN-associated CCH and small MTC, bcl-2 was strongly expressed, bcl-x was moderately expressed and bax was only weakly expressed. Advanced tumours and LNM did show a more heterogeneous bcl-2 staining accompanied by an increased bax expression and accelerated proliferation. The rate of apoptosis was extremely low in all investigated tumours. P53 was detectable in three patients with rapidly growing and extensively metastasising MTC. No somatic p53 mutations were found. Hereditary MTC with germline RET mutations at codon 918 (MEN2b) and codon 634 revealed a bias towards a higher proliferation activity at a younger age and are more frequently accompanied by LNM. CCH and MTC are characterised with a preponderance of bcl-2 as a factor blocking the programmed cell death. While MTC, in general, is a slowly growing tumour, a minority of tumours do progress rapidly with high proliferation. The factors leading to an accelerated tumour progression do not seem to take their effect via the regulation of apoptosis. Certain alterations of RET are supposed to have a direct or indirect implication on proliferation and, because of this, an effect on the clinical course.
98	DR	11021799	NA
98	DR	11016655	Germ line mutations of the RET proto-oncogene are responsible for the development of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN 2A), an inherited cancer syndrome characterized by medullary thyroid carcinoma, pheochromocytoma, and parathyroid hyperplasia. To study the mechanism of tissue-specific tumor development by RET with a MEN2A (cysteine 634-->arginine) mutation, we generated transgenic mice by introducing the RET-MEN2A gene fused to Moloney murine leukemia virus long terminal repeat. Expression of the transgene and its product was detected at variable levels in a variety of tissues including thyroid, heart, liver, colon, parotid gland, and brain. All of 29 mice analyzed developed thyroid C-cell hyperplasia or medullary carcinoma, accompanying high levels of serum calcitonin. In addition, development of mammary or parotid gland adenocarcinoma was observed in one-half of the transgenic mice. RET dimerization and its complex formation with Shc and Grb2 adaptor proteins were detected in tumor tissues. Unexpectedly, no tumor formation was found in other tissues despite RET-MEN2A expression where RET dimerization was undetectable. Because these tissues but not tumors expressed glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor family receptor alpha (GFR alpha) at high levels, this suggested that GFR alpha expression may interfere in the dimerization of the RET-MEN2A mutant proteins, leading to tissue-specific tumor development in vivo.
98	NR	10982477	Hirschsprung disease (HSCR; McKusick 142623) or aganglionic megacolon is a frequent (1 in 5,000 live births) heritable disorder of the enteric nervous system. By haplotyping with a variety of microsatellite markers, by amplifying all 20 exons of the RET proto-oncogene and by applying a direct DNA sequencing protocol, we have analyzed the DNA from HSCR patients in 6 different families. In one family with a joint occurrence of HSCR and FMTC (follicular medullary thyroid carcinoma), we have identified a mutation in codon 609 in one out of 6 cysteine residues encoded in exon 10 of the RET gene. This C609R point mutation has not previously been reported to cause HSCR. In 2 of the HSCR patients described here from different families, we have found a mutation in exon 2 (R77C) and a silent mutation in exon 3 (Y204Y), respectively, in the extracellular part of the RET proto-oncogene. In introns 2 and 17 of the RET proto-oncogene in 2 families, we have detected single nucleotide exchanges that are probably polymorphisms with unknown, if any, relations to HSCR. The DNA sequences of 5 further genes (GDNF, GDNFRalpha, EDN3, EDNRB, and NTN), that may contribute to the development of HSCR, have not shown mutations in the patients analyzed so far. In 2 of the reported families with several affected children and one grandchild, sequence analyses revealed no mutations in the coding regions of any of the candidate genes analyzed. Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
98	DR	10980597	The RET proto-oncogene is often activated through somatic rearrangements in papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTCs). Three main rearranged forms of RET have been described: RET/PTC1 and RET/PTC3, which arise from a paracentric inversion and RET/PTC2, which originates from a 10 : 17 translocation. We previously developed a dual-color FISH test to detect these RET rearrangements in interphase nuclei of thyroid lesions. This approach allowed us to detect a novel translocation involving the RET region, which was not detectable by RT - PCR with specific primers for known rearrangements. A combination of RT - PCR and RACE analyses finally led to the identification of the fusion gene, which involves the 5' portion of PCM-1, a gene coding for a centrosomal protein with distinct cell cycle distribution, and the RET tyrosine kinase (TK) domain. FISH analysis confirmed the chromosomal localization of PCM-1 on chromosome 8p21-22, a region commonly deleted in several tumors. Immunohistochemistry, using an antibody specific for the C-terminal portion of PCM-1 showed that the protein level is drastically decreased and its subcellular localization is altered in thyroid tumor tissue with respect to normal thyroid. However, heterozygosity is retained for seven microsatellite markers in the 8p21-22 region, suggesting that the non-rearranged PCM-1 allele is not lost and that the translocation is balanced. Oncogene (2000) 19, 4236 - 4242
98	DR	10953992	BACKGROUND: Autosomal dominant cancer syndrome--multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2), may exist more often than expected in patients with pheochromocytoma. Germline mutations identified recently in MEN 2 can be revealed by genetic screening. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the frequency of RET (rearranged during transfection) mutations in patients with pheochromocytoma. DESIGN AND METHODS: We genetically screened germline mutations in the RET proto-oncogene and clinically re-evaluated patients with pheochromocytoma. A pentagastrin test and other biochemical studies were performed in all patients. SETTING: Department of Internal Medicine and Hypertension, The Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland and the Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, Albert Ludwigs University, Freiburg, Germany. PARTICIPANTS: Seventy seven unselected patients with pheochromocytoma (19 men, 58 women, mean age: 51.55 +/- 1.5 years; pheochromocytoma confirmed histopathologically) out of 162 diagnosed and treated in the years 1957-1998 in the Department of Internal Medicine and Hypertension in Warsaw, Poland. The other 85 patients did not respond to the written invitation. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The finding of RET mutations and diagnosis of MEN 2 in patients with pheochromocytoma. RESULTS: Genetic testing revealed germline mutations in the RET proto-oncogene in six patients (7.8%). All carriers had mutation of exon 11, codon 634: TGC to CGC. In four patients with this mutation, medullary thyroid carcinoma (MIC) was diagnosed and in three cases, surgically treated. Biochemical parameters: parathormone 31.88 +/- 2.87 pg/ml, calcitonin: 0 min 0.23 +/- 0.14 ng/ml; 2 min 0.49 +/- 0.21 ng/ml; 5 min 0.48 +/- 0.21 ng/ml, metoxycatecholamines: 601.62 +/- 42.71 microg/24h, epinephrine: 1.94 +/- 0.17 microg/24h, norepinephrine 13.96 +/- 1.3 microg/24h, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) 9.94 +/- 4.3 ng/ml. Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM): systolic blood pressure (SBP): 116 +/- 1.9 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure (DBP): 73.7 +/- 0.9 mmHg. Clinical, biochemical and imaging procedures did not reveal any recurrence of pheochromocytoma in the 77 patients studied. CONCLUSIONS: Patients with pheochromocytoma should be genetically screened for mutations of the RET proto-oncogene. These patients should undergo clinical screening for MEN 2. In addition, genetic studies can be useful for the screening of the families of the carriers.
98	DR	10951350	BACKGROUND: The results and consequences of genetic testing in a family with familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC) are described. METHODS: In the screening of relatives, serum calcitonin is replaced by RET mutation analysis that was performed in families suspected of hereditary medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC). In 4 of 10 families, mutation in exon 10 was found in codon 611. RESULTS: One hundred fifty persons belonging to 30 families were tested, of which 10 families were carriers of RET mutation in exon 10. In 1 of these families with MTC only, 2 brothers were gene carriers of a RET codon 611 mutation and lived without any sign of MTC. One is aged 79 years, and the other died at the age of 71 of other causes. CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that the gene carrier in families with MTC without other endocrine tumors (FMTC) exhibits a highly variable disease course. A 611 codon mutation is most often a rather mild and slow progression form of MTC. Because 2 gene carriers were still alive at age 70 years without showing any sign of the disease, it is tempting to ask if all gene carriers with a 611 codon mutation without other endocrine tumors should be operated on, and if so, at what age? In the authors' opinion, more information is needed to be able to answer these questions. The current guidelines for treatment of patients with hereditary MTC are discussed. Copyright 2000 American Cancer Society.
98	DR	10947080	The RET proto-oncogene encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase activated by the binding of factors from the glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) family to receptor-alpha components such as GDNF family receptor alpha-1 (GFR alpha-1). Mutations within the sequence of the RET proto-oncogene are associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2), an inherited tumor syndrome characterized by the development of medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) and other neuroendocrine tumors. Despite Northern analysis showing that RET is expressed in the majority of MTCs, the factors regulating this expression are poorly understood. To address this issue we examined RET expression in response to glucocorticoids in the TT cell line, derived from a metastatic MTC. The synthetic glucocorticoid dexamethasone was found to reduce RET expression at both mRNA and protein levels. This effect was dose responsive and maximal at 24 h. The reduction in RET mRNA was shown to be specific to glucocorticoids and was also seen in a primary MTC culture. Nuclear run-on studies revealed the reduction in steady-state RNA to be due to a decrease in RET mRNA transcription and the effect was shown to be independent of new protein synthesis or RNA stability. Dexamethasone was also found to exert an inhibitory effect upon cell growth, suggesting a potential use for glucocorticoids in the treatment of medullary carcinoma and MEN 2.
98	DR	10946873	The world's highest incidence of thyroid cancer has been reported among females in New Caledonia, a French overseas territory in the Pacific located between Australia and Fiji. To date, no molecular genetic studies in this population are available. Over the past few years, the oncogenic rearrangement of the ret protooncogene (ret/ptc) has been studied in papillary carcinomas in different populations. In this study, we investigated the prevalence and distribution of ret/ptc1, 2, and 3 in papillary thyroid carcinoma from the New Caledonian population and compared the pattern with that of an Australian population. Fresh-frozen and paraffin-embedded papillary carcinomas from 27 New Caledonian and 20 Australian patients were examined for ret rearrangements by means of RT-PCR with primers flanking the chimeric region, followed by hybridization with radioactive probes. ret/ptc was present in 70% of the New Caledonian and in 85% of the Australian samples. Multiple rearrangements were detected and confirmed by sequencing in 19 cases, 4 of which had 3 types of rearrangements in the same tumor. This study demonstrates a high prevalence of ret/ptc in New Caledonian and Australian papillary carcinoma. The findings of multiple ret/ptc in the same tumor suggest that some thyroid neoplasms may indeed be polyclonal.
98	NR	10940682	Through insights into the molecular genetics of neuroendocrine tumors (NETs), the genes predisposing to multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes were identified. In MEN1, tumors occur in the parathyroids, endocrine pancreas, anterior pituitary, adrenal glands and thymic neuroendocrine tissues. The MEN1 gene encodes a putative growth-suppressor protein, menin, binding JunD, a transcriptional factor belonging to the AP-1 complex. However, new partners binding menin remain to be found. The MEN1 gene might be involved in 1-50% of sporadic NETs. Another critical mechanism involved in NETs is the deregulation of the RET-signalling pathways by oncogenic point mutations responsible for MEN2 syndromes. MEN2 refers to the inherited forms of medullary thyroid carcinoma. The RET proto-oncogene, a tyrosine-kinase receptor, is activated by missense mutations occurring either in the extracellular dimerization domain or intracellular tyrosine kinase catalytic regions. In both cases the receptor is constitutionally activated in the absence of natural ligands. Endocrine tumors also belong to the clinical pattern of Recklinghausen (NF1) and von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) diseases. The genes for both syndromes have been characterized and provide new pathways for endocrine tumorigenesis related to G-protein physiology (NF1) and transcriptional regulation and/or endothelial cell proliferation (VHL), respectively. Here, we propose a basic overview of recent data on genetic events leading a normal endocrine cell towards a fully malignant phenotype. Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel
98	DR	10931090	Two main types of RET/PTC oncogene, named RET/PTC-1 and 3, occur in papillary thyroid carcinomas especially in those from Belarus children after the Chernobyl nuclear accident. Several variants of RET/PTC-3 have also been found, having different break points with respect to the classical RET/PTC-3. To our knowledge, no variant of RET/PTC-1 has been described up to now. We found a post-Chernobyl papillary thyroid carcinoma with an RET/PTC-1 rearrangement characterized by a transcript longer than expected. Sequence analysis of the PCR product obtained after RT-PCR revealed new fusion points between H4 and RET genes. The genomic sequence showed new breakpoints in both H4 intronic and in RET exonic regions. The RET gene breakpoint occurred within exon 11, at variance with the classical form of RET/PTC-1, in which it is in intron 11. As a consequence of this new fusion point, the transcript included 132 nucleotides of exon 11, coding for 44 amino acids of RET protein. Regarding the H4 gene, the classical breakpoint is in the first intron and the cDNA contains a fragment of 339 nucleotides. In our case the cDNA had a longer fragment of H4 involving a total of 1266 nucleotides. Sequencing of genomic DNA revealed a rearrangement breakpoint at position 886 of a new H4 intron located downstream of the 1266 coding region. Furthermore, as a consequence of the activation of a cryptic splicing site, 132 nucleotides of this intron were spliced between the H4 and RET genes. Sequence analysis of the new chimera showed that the original frames of H4 and RET were joint with the intronic sequence without disruption of the open reading frame (ORF). Moreover, the genomic DNA of this case showed transforming activity in the DNA-mediated transfection assay using NIH-3T3 cells. In conclusion, we describe here the first variant of RET/PTC-1 oncogene, which we have termed 'long'-PTC-1, characterized by new breakpoints of both genes involved in the rearrangement and having transforming activity. Similar to previously reported PTC-3 variants, long-PTC-1 has been found in a post-Chernobyl papillary thyroid carcinoma confirming that RET/PTC rearrangements other than the classical forms (RET/PTC-1 and -3) are specifically associated with radiation-induced papillary thyroid cancer.
98	DR	10919641	The RET tyrosine kinase is a functional receptor for neurotrophic ligands of the glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) family. Loss of function of RET is associated with congenital megacolon or Hirschsprung's disease, whereas germ-line point mutations causing RET activation are responsible for multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2A, MEN2B, and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma) syndromes. Here we show that the expression of a constitutively active RET-MEN2A oncogene promotes survival of rat pheochromocytoma PC12 cells upon growth factor withdrawal. Moreover, we show that the RET-MEN2A-mediated survival depends on signals transduced by the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades. Thus, in PC12 cells, RET-MEN2A associates with the PI3K regulatory subunit p85 and promotes activation of Akt (also referred to as protein kinase B) in a PI3K-dependent fashion; in addition, RET-MEN2A promotes MAPK activation. PI3K recruitment and Akt activation as well as MAPK activation depend on RET-MEN2A tyrosine residue 1062. As a result, tyrosine 1062 of RET-MEN2A is essential for RET-MEN2A-mediated survival of PC12 cells cultured in growth factor-depleted media.
98	DR	10921320	NA
98	NR	10910073	We have studied a patient who presented with clinical features suggestive of chronic myeloid leukemia in accelerated phase. BCR-ABL transcripts were undetectable by reverse transcription-PCR, but a novel reciprocal translocation, t(5;10)(q33;q21.2), was seen by standard cytogenetic analysis. Chromosome band 5q33 contains the gene encoding the platelet-derived growth factor beta receptor (PDGFbetaR), the receptor tyrosine kinase that is disrupted by the t(5;7), t(5;12), and t(5;14) in myeloid disorders, resulting in the fusion of PDGFbetaR to HIP1, TEL/ETV6, and CEV14, respectively. Southern analysis with PDGFbetaR cDNA revealed novel bands in patient but not control DNA after digestion with several restriction enzymes, indicating that this gene is also targeted by the t(5;10). Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis of chromosome 5 indicated that a small inversion at 5q33 had taken place in addition to the interchromosomal translocation. The site of the chromosome 10 breakpoint fell within YAC 940e4. Because all PDGFbetaR fusions described thus far result in splicing to a common exon of this gene, we performed 5'-rapid amplification of cDNA ends PCR on patient RNA. Several clones were isolated in which PDGFbetaR fused in frame to H4/D10S170, a previously described ubiquitously expressed gene that is fused to the ret protein tyrosine kinase to form the PTC-1 oncogene in approximately 20% of papillary thyroid carcinomas. The presence of H4-PDGFbetaR chimeric mRNA in the patient was confirmed by reverse transcription-PCR; reciprocal PDGFbeta1R-H4 transcripts were not detected. We conclude that t(5;10)(q33;q21.2) is a novel translocation in BCR-ABL-negative chronic myeloid leukemia and that this abnormality results in an H4-PDGFbetaR fusion gene. This finding further strengthens the association between myeloproliferative disorders and deregulated tyrosine kinases.
98	DR	10882153	Different forms of RET mutations are found in papillary and medullary thyroid carcinomas. Rearrangements with other genes (RET/PTC oncogene) play a causative role in a significant proportion of papillary thyroid carcinomas. In this case, several factors influence the frequency and the type of RET/PTC, such as exposure to radiation, age and histological variant of the papillary tumor. On the other hand, the presence of the mutation does not seem to influence the biological behavior of the tumor or its response to conventional treatment modalities. In the setting of medullary thyroid cancer, germline RET point-mutations are implicated in the pathogenesis of virtually all hereditary forms and somatic point-mutations in nearly half of the sporadic forms. The clinical impact of this finding is that family members at-risk of hereditary MTC may be screened by genetic analysis, to distinguish those carrying or not-carrying the mutation. The last can be reassured on their status and relieved from further follow-up. Those with the mutation may be treated at a pre-clinical stage of the disease or even before the disease is started. The present review is focused on the clinical implication of RET gene mutations in thyroid cancer patients.
98	NR	10878547	This study has investigated the role of the RET proto-oncogene, which has been identified as the susceptibility gene for multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 2, in the development of sporadic and familial extra-adrenal paragangliomas. RET protein expression was analysed by immunohistochemistry. Subsequently, DNA extracted from 52 tumours of 44 patients was screened for somatic RET point mutations in exons 10, 11, and 13-16, where oncogenic mutations have recently been described in a subset of sporadic medullary thyroid carcinomas and phaeochromocytomas. The methods employed included non-isotopic polymerase chain reaction-based single strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) analysis and heteroduplex gel electrophoresis, followed by direct sequencing of PCR products. RET protein expression was demonstrated in all ten paragangliomas tested. However, none of the familial or sporadic extra-adrenal paragangliomas contained somatic mutations in exons 10, 11, or 13-16 of the RET proto-oncogene, whereas control samples with known mutations in these exons exhibited the expected band shift, or yielded an additional band with retarded migration. Although paragangliomas exhibit RET protein expression, these data indicate that oncogenic RET proto-oncogene mutations do not appear to be generally important in the formation of sporadic paragangliomas. Copyright 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
98	DR	10876191	BACKGROUND: Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC) are autosomal dominantly inherited cancer syndromes that predispose to C-cell hyperplasia and MTC. MEN 2A and FMTC are caused by mutations in the RET proto-oncogene. METHODS: We used a multiplex polymerase chain reaction-based assay to screen exons 10, 11, 13, and 14 of RET for mutations in 2 families with FMTC. We correlated mutation status with calcitonin and pathologic studies to determine genotype-phenotype correlations. RESULTS: We identified a mutation in codon 804 in exon 14 (GTG-->ATG; V804M) in both families. An 86-year-old person who was a gene carrier and other individuals over age 70 who were suspected by pedigree analysis to be gene carriers had no overt clinical evidence of MTC. Four of 21 patients who underwent a thyroidectomy also had papillary thyroid cancer. One individual in each family had metastatic MTC at age 30 and 32 years, and all 26 people having thyroidectomies had either MTC or C-cell hyperplasia, leading us to continue to recommend prophylactic thyroidectomy for all identified patients who were gene carriers. CONCLUSIONS: Because of active MTC in younger members of these families, including metastases, we have continued to advocate thyroid surgery in mutation-positive individuals. While DNA diagnosis of gene carriers and subsequent genetic counseling was relatively straightforward, the acceptance of surgical recommendations was more difficult for some individuals. These families demonstrate that the search for RET mutations should include exons 13, 14, 15, and 16 in patients whose studies in exons 10 and 11 are negative.
98	PR	10871851	We recently described germline and somatic mutations in the MET gene associated with papillary renal carcinoma type 1. MET mutation M1268T was located in a codon highly conserved among receptor tyrosine kinases, and homologous to the codon mutated in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B, and many cases of sporadic medullary carcinoma of the thyroid gland (Ret M918T). Ret M918T and MET M1268T have previously been shown to be highly active in mouse NIH3T3 transformation assays, and to change the substrate specificity of the kinase. We studied the mechanism of transformation mediated by MET M1268T by analysing a clone, F4, derived from NIH3T3 cells transformed by MET M1268T. In contrast to NIH3T3 cells, F4 cells grew in suspension in tissue culture, and rapidly formed tumors in nude mice. We found that c-Src was constitutively bound to MET proteins in F4 cells, and that Src kinase activity was elevated. Transfection of dominant negative Src constructs into F4 cells eliminated the ability of F4 cells to grow in suspension culture and retarded the growth of F4 cells in vivo. The ability of transfected dominant negative Src constructs to inhibit the growth of F4 cells correlated with the inhibition of phosphorylation of paxillin and focal adhesion kinase. Transfection of dominant negative Src constructs into F4 cells had no effect on Grb2 binding or PLC gamma phosphorylation. The results suggest that c-Src participates in the tumorigenic phenotype induced in NIH3T3 cells by MET M1268T by signaling through focal adhesion kinase and paxillin. Oncogene (2000).
98	DR	10871866	Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B (MEN 2B) is a familial cancer syndrome, in which the cardinal feature is medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), a malignant tumor arising from the calcitonin producing thyroid C-cells. MEN 2B is associated with a germline point mutation in the RET proto-oncogene, leading to a Met-->Thr substitution at codon 918 in the kinase domain, which alters the substrate specificity of the protein. We used the human calcitonin gene (CALC-I) promoter to generate transgenic mice expressing either the human RET oncogene with the MEN2B-specific 918 Met-->Thr mutation (CALC-MEN2B-RET) or the human non-mutated RET proto-oncogene (CALC-WT-RET) in the C-cells. At 20 - 22 months of age three out of eight CALC-MEN2B-RET transgenic founders presented with macroscopic bilateral MTC. In two founders nodular C-cell hyperplasia (CCH) was observed. Thyroid abnormalities were never observed in CALC-WT-RET transgenic mice or control non-transgenic mice analysed at this age. In some mice from established CALC-MEN2B-RET transgenic lines nodular CCH was observed from 8 months on whereas MTC was detected in 13% of mice from one CALC-MEN2B-RET line, from the age of 11 months on. These results show for the first time that the MEN2B mutation in the RET oncogene predisposes mice for MTC.
98	DR	10865039	Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) is an uncommon thyroid tumor that has attracted a great deal of interest because of its frequent presentation as a familial tumor and its primary involvement in the type II multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes MEN-IIA and MEN-IIB and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC). The MTC tumor cells secrete the polypeptide hormone calcitonin, which serves as an excellent tumor marker, useful for defining the presence of disease, preoperatively or following thyroidectomy. The discovery that mutations in the RET proto-oncogene are associated with MEN-II syndromes was highly significant in that it demonstrated a clear correlation between genotype and phenotype; and most importantly it provided a mechanism whereby family members at risk could be identified by direct DNA analysis. Virtually all patients with MEN-IIA, MEN-IIB, and FMTC develop MTC; therefore there is a clear rationale for performing thyroidectomy as soon as a RET mutation has been identified. Because MTC appears to be much more aggressive in patients with MEN-IIB, thyroidectomy is performed during the first year of life in this setting, whereas in patients with MEN-IIA, where the tumor appears to be more indolent, the procedure can be safety delayed until age 5 years. Reoperative neck exploration in patients with evidence of persistent or recurrent MTC has been effective in a significant number of patients, although the success of the operation requires careful patient selection and preoperative assessment. MTC, as expressed in the MEN-II syndromes, is an excellent model to evaluate the usefulness of interventional therapy in patients demonstrated to have a genetic predisposition for cancer.
98	DR	10865036	The study of thyroid tumor genetics has great relevance to surgeons and facilitates understanding tumor pathogenesis, prediction of tumor behavior, and management decisions. The genes implicated can be broadly categorized as oncogenes or tumor-suppressor genes. The RET oncogene has well established roles in the development of both papillary (PTC) and medullary (MTC) thyroid carcinoma. Genetic screening for germline RET mutations in members of multiple endocrine neoplasia type II (MEN-II) families is now widely performed, and prophylactic thyroidectomy in gene carriers is advisable at an early age. Patients with apparently sporadic MTC can also be screened to rule out familial disease. The demonstration of a RET rearrangement in a patient's PTC may have prognostic significance, but as yet there are no management implications. The thyrotropin receptor (TSH-R) and Gsalpha become oncogenic through point mutation and are associated with the development of toxic thyroid adenomas. The ras oncogene is implicated in the early stages of development of several thyroid tumor types. Tumor-suppressor genes also have a role in thyroid tumor formation. The p53 gene appears to be involved in the process of transformation to the anaplastic phenotype and the PTEN gene in the development of follicular adenomas but not carcinomas. There is still limited evidence for the so called adenoma-carcinoma sequence of the thyroid follicular cell. Loss of heterozygosity studies have enabled identification of tumor-suppressor genes, and their findings suggests differences in the pathogenesis of PTCs compared with follicular cancers. Surgical decision-making will benefit from these basic molecular advances, which rapidly translates into improved patient management.
98	NR	10860579	Members of the GDNF protein family signal through receptors consisting of a GPI-linked GFRalpha subunit and the transmembrane tyrosine kinase Ret. Here we characterize the mouse Gfra4 and show that it undergoes developmentally regulated alternative splicing in several tissues. The mammalian GFRalpha4 receptor lacks the first Cys-rich domain characteristic of other GFRalpha receptors. Gfra4 is expressed in many tissues, including nervous system, in which intron retention leads to a putative intracellular or secreted GFRalpha4 protein. Efficient splicing occurs only in thyroid, parathyroid, and pituitary and less in adrenal glands. A splice form that leads to a GPI-linked GFRalpha4 receptor is expressed in juvenile thyroid and parathyroid glands. In newborn and mature thyroid as well as in parathyroid and pituitary glands major transcripts encode for a putative transmembrane isoform of GFRalpha4. Significant loss of thyroid C cells in Ret-deficient mice suggests that C cells and cells in adrenal medulla, which also express Ret, may require signaling via the GFRalpha4-Ret receptor. Finally, in human, GFRalpha4 expression may restrict the inherited cancer syndrome multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2, associated with mutations in RET, to these cells. Copyright 2000 Academic Press.
98	DR	10850414	Evaluation of 20 cases of radiation-induced childhood papillary thyroid carcinoma using fluorescence in situ hybridization demonstrated the presence of clonal translocations affecting the RET locus. Semiquantitative reverse transcription-PCR indicated overexpression of the RET tyrosine kinase (TK) domain in four cases. In two cases, the RET rearrangements PTC6 and PTC7 were identified and assigned to balanced translocations t(7;10)(q32;q11.2) and t(1;10)(p13;q11.2), respectively. In one case with a balanced translocation t(10;14)(q11.2;q22.1), 5' rapid amplification of cDNA ends revealed a novel type of RET oncogenic activation (PTC8), arising from a fusion of the 5' part of the kinectin (KTN1) gene to the TK domain of the RET gene. The presence of coiled-coil domains in the resulting ktn1/ret fusion protein suggests ligand-independent dimerization and thus constitutive activation of the ret TK domain.
98	DR	10849017	In the last years of the previous century the genes involved in the aetiology of five endocrine tumour syndromes have been identified. The tumour-suppressor gene that is responsible for Von Hippel-Lindau Disease was cloned in 1993; multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) types 2A and 2B and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma were found to be caused by activating mutations in the ret proto-oncogene in 1993 and 1994, and most recently the menin-gene, another tumour-suppressor gene, was shown to be associated with MEN-1. As usual, the answer to one question leads to innumerable new questions. And so, now we want to know the extent to which germ-line mutations (de novo, or otherwise previously undetected) in these genes play a role in the occurrence of the various endocrine tumours that are associated with these syndromes in apparently sporadic cases. We also want to know if the nature of the (germ-line) mutation conveys any information about the characteristics (phenotype) of the disease. We want to know the role of somatic mutations in these genes in truly sporadic tumours. And finally we want to know the exact function of the proteins that are encoded by these genes. The paper by Roijers et al. [1] elsewhere in this issue is an example of a small but well-directed step on the way to address some of these questions with respect to the menin-gene. It addresses the problem of patient selection when looking for germ-line mutations in apparently sporadic MEN-1 patients. In this review we want to give a brief summary of the present status with regard to some of the questions mentioned above, in relation to the endocrine tumour syndromes caused by the vhl, ret and menin genes.
98	DR	10843288	The authors report 11 patients with genetically determined medullary microcarcinomas. Nine patients were either children or adolescents and two patients were young adults. The youngest patient was 7 years old and the oldest was 34 years of age (mean age, 15.4 yrs). The preoperative diagnosis was based on family history and elevated serum calcitonin levels. In addition, six patients had RET protooncogene mutations in exons 10, 11, and 16. Two patients who had the RET protooncogene mutations did not have serum calcitonin measurements. Nine patients had bilateral medullary microcarcinomas (<1.0 cm), whereas the two patients with unilateral tumors demonstrated multifocal disease. The principle microscopic differences between these genetically determined medullary microcarcinomas and larger sporadic (>1 cm) medullary carcinomas were the low incidence of stromal desmoplasia and amyloid deposition, the high incidence of C-cell hyperplasia, and the low incidence of lymph node metastases. Only one patient, a 34-year-old man, presented with lymph node metastases. All patients remain disease free 11 to 70 months after diagnosis. This small series of thyroid microcarcinomas illustrates the impact molecular diagnostics is having on the management and prognosis of genetically determined medullary carcinoma.
98	NR	10839611	Divergent endocrine-neuroendocrine differentiation in thyroid carcinoma occurs in mixed medullary-follicular carcinomas (MMFC). Less than 40 cases of MMFC have been reported having highly heterogeneous patterns of growth. Classical medullary carcinoma areas may be intermingled with follicles or papillae or even oxyphilic and solid areas. Calcitonin and thyroglobulin are expressed in different cell populations. Presence of the latter suggests a potential usefulness of radioiodine treatment. The clinical behavior of MMFC does not differ from that of ordinary medullary carcinoma. The histogenesis of MMFC is controversial. The genetic analysis of the 2 neoplastic components showed that they are not derived from a common precursor, but rather display remarkable differences in the genetic profile (RET mutations and allelic losses). In addition, in some cases the follicular component was found to be oligo/polyclonal and therefore possibly hyperplastic rather than neoplastic. The follicular cells may have grown into the medullary carcinoma, after acquiring some molecular defect, being "hostage" of the true neoplastic (medullary) component.
98	NR	10836212	Papillary microcarcinoma (PMC) of the thyroid is the most common form of thyroid cancer, which usually remains clinically silent until its incidental histologic diagnosis in autopsy or surgical material. Autopsy incidence varies from 3%-36%. PMC may, however, present with clinical symptoms, the commonest of which is cervical lymphadenopathy with or without palpable thyroid nodules. Other reported presentations include cystic neck mass, pulmonary mass (es), metastases in the skull or vertebral column. The upper limit of size to define PMC is 10 mm in most studies but many studies include lesions up to 15 mm in diameter. Histologic variants include encapsulated and partially encapsulated papillary carcinoma, circumscribed microcarcinoma and occult sclerosing carcinoma. Younger age and size less than 10 mm (< 15 mm in other studies) are considered to be favorable prognostic factors. Size alone, however, cannot be regarded as a determinant of prognosis. Older age, larger tumor size, distant metastases, capsular invasion and multifocality indicate unfavorable prognosis. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) is an infrequent finding, since small deletions may be missed by southern blot analysis. Activation of oncogenes ret and trk have been reported in papillary carcinoma. Some authors advocate conservative while others favor aggressive therapy including total thyroidectomy with or without Iodine 131ablation. Additional investigative techniques are needed to identify the subset of PMC cases with a potential for aggressive clinical course, thereby targeting more aggressive therapy to an appropriate subset of tumors.
98	DR	10834397	Human thyroid tumors can be derived either from epithelial follicular cells or from parafollicular C-cells. Follicular cell-derived tumors represent a wide spectrum of lesions, ranging from benign adenomas through differentiated (follicular and papillary) and undifferentiated (anaplastic) carcinomas, thus providing a good model for finding a correlation between specific genetic lesions and histologic phenotype. Follicular adenomas and carcinomas show frequently the presence of mutations in one of the three ras genes. Papillary carcinomas show frequently a specific gene rearrangement which gives rise to the formation of several types of so-called RET/PTC chimeric genes. This lesions occur in almost 50% of papillary cancers and consist in the juxtaposition of the 3' or tyrosine kinase domain of the RET gene (which codes for a receptor protein not normally expressed in follicular thyroid cells) with the 5' domain of ubiquitously expressed genes, which provide the promoter and dimerization functions, necessary for the constitutive activation of RET/PTC proteins. Anaplastic carcinomas are frequently associated with mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor. Finally, point mutations of the RET gene are found in familial endocrine syndromes (FMTC; MEN2A and MEN2B), a common feature of which is the medullary thyroid carcinoma, a malignant tumor derived from parafollicular C-cells.
98	DR	10826520	NA
98	DR	10822879	NA
98	DR	10822229	OBJECTIVE: Mutations in the RET proto-oncogene are found in about one third of sporadic medullary thyroid carcinomas (MTCs), mostly affecting codon 918. Glial cell line derived neurotropic factor (GDNF) and its membrane-bound GDNF family receptor alpha (GFRalpha-1), as well as neurturin (NTN) and its membrane-bound receptor GFRalpha-2 form a complex with the RET product, a receptor tyrosine kinase, resulting in downstream signaling to the nucleus. DESIGN: To elucidate the role of these RET ligands in MTC tumorigenesis, their expression was determined in 15 MTC samples, one papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) and three normal thyroid tissue specimens. METHODS: The mRNA expression of RET, GDNF, GFRalpha-1, NTN and GFRalpha-2 was investigated by mRNA in situ hybridization, and confirmed by reverse transcription-PCR analysis. RESULTS: None of the five genes was expressed in the normal thyroids or in the PTC. All MTCs showed expression of RET, 13 expressed GDNF, 12 expressed GFRalpha-1 and 9 expressed NTN and GFRalpha-2. In 7 of the tumors RET, GDNF and GFRalpha-1 were expressed at high levels, and in five of these seven tumors NTN and GFRalpha-2 genes were also expressed at high levels. The high level of expression was preferentially seen in tumor cells adjacent to stroma and connective tissue. All MTCs without expression of the RET ligands harbored the RET codon 918 mutation. CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that this signaling pathway is important for MTC development, and that it may be activated by expression of the RET ligand complexes by the tumor cells themselves.
98	NR	10822219	OBJECTIVE: Restriction analysis is a straightforward procedure for mutational analysis. It is commonly used for screening RET mutations. Incomplete digestion is a well-known cause of false results. Herein, we report another limitation of the method. DESIGN AND METHODS: Screening for somatic mutations in RET exons 16, 13 and 15 was performed in a patient with a sporadic medullary thyroid carcinoma. Genetic study was carried out by both restriction analysis and direct sequencing. RESULTS: A somatic trinucleotide change encompassing codons 882 and 883 of the RET proto-oncogene (GTA GCT to GTT TTT) was documented. Particular to this case is the silent mutation (GTA-->GTT) at codon 882. Independently, both the novel silent mutation and the missense mutation at codon 883 may disrupt the same AluI restriction site. Based on the restriction pattern we were able to say that both mutations occurred in the same allele. CONCLUSIONS: Restriction analysis is an easy approach for screening RET mutations; however, it is not enough to assign a final diagnosis.
98	DR	10812967	The RET receptor tyrosine kinase was first identified in a screen for human oncogenes and has subsequently been linked to several human syndromes: Hirschprung's disease, multiple endocrine neoplasia types 2A and 2B and familial thyroid carcinoma. Interestingly, all of the tissues affected by mutations in RET are derived from the neural crest during development. RET transduces a signal following activation by ligands of the glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) family of neurotrophins which currently comprises GDNF, neuturin (NTN), artemin (ART) and persephin (PSP). To activate RET they form a tripartite complex with RET and a member of a family of four extracellular, GPI-linked alpha receptors (GFR alpha 1-4). Specificity is achieved by each GFR alpha binding only one member of the GDNF family with high affinity. Current evidence indicates that signal transduction by RET activates several second messenger systems including the PLC gamma, Ras, JNK and inositol phosphate pathways. Targeted mutagenesis in transgenic mice has shown that Ret, GFR alpha 1 and GDNF are required for multiple developmental events including development of the enteric nervous system (ENS) affected in Hirschsprung's disease. We describe experiments in chick neural crest cells which provide evidence for the normal function of RET and the basis of the defect in Hirschsprung's disease.
98	DR	10805954	Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1), and the multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 syndromes (MEN 2A, MEN 2B, and familial non-MEN medullary thyroid carcinoma [FMTC]) encompass a wide range of endocrine problems, but arise from only two genes: the MEN 1 tumor suppressor gene and the RET proto-oncogene. MEN 1 is characterized by parathyroid hyperplasia, pancreaticoduodenal neuroendocrine tumors (PNTs), and pituitary adenomas. Surgery is the principal treatment modality for hyperparathyroidism and PNTs, but questions still remain concerning the timing and extent of surgery for PNTs. The MEN 2 syndromes are characterized by complete penetrance of medullary thyroid cancer. The MEN 2 syndromes differ in their variable expression of hyperparathyroidism, pheochromocytomas, and other clinical features. Genetic testing for mutations in the RET gene has revolutionized treatment by enabling thyroidectomies before significant disease occurs. Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
98	DR	10787193	A marked increase in the incidence of papillary thyroid cancer in children has been documented in regions of the former Soviet Union most heavily contaminated by radioactive fallout from the Chernobyl nuclear power plant accident in April 1986. Accumulation of radioactive iodines by normal iodine trapping mechanisms resulted in significant radiation doses to the thyroid gland. Although it has long been known that thyroidal radiation resulted in nuclear and chromosomal abnormalities visible by light microscopy, modern molecular biology techniques are beginning to identify much smaller alterations in chromosomal coding sequences that are associated with malignant transformation. Although stable chromosomal abnormalities can be detected in Chernobyl-associated thyroid cancers, they are much less prevalent than in thyroid cancers developing after external beam irradiation. However, several unique chromosomal breakpoints have been described in radiation-associated thyroid cancers that are not commonly found in spontaneously occurring thyroid cancer. Furthermore, activation of specific subtypes of the ret/PTC tyrosine kinase oncogene appears to be more common in radiation-associated thyroid cancers than in spontaneous thyroid cancers. In summary, thyroid cancers developing in the aftermath of the Chernobyl accident provide a unique opportunity to search for chromosomal abnormalities that may be specific for radiation-induced thyroid cancer.
98	DR	10773666	Activation of the RET protooncogene through somatic rearrangements represents the most common genetic alteration in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC). Three main rearranged forms of RET have been described: RET/PTC1 and RET/PTC3, which arise from a paracentric inversion of the long arm of chromosome 10, and RET/PTC2, which originates from a 10;17 translocation. We have developed a dual-color FISH approach to detect RET/PTC rearrangements in interphase nuclei of thyroid lesions. By using a pool of three cosmids encompassing the RET chromosome region and a chromosome 10 centromeric probe, we could discriminate between the presence of an inversion (RET/PTC1 and RET/PTC3) or a translocation (RET/PTC2). We have investigated a series of thyroid tissue samples from Italian and French patients corresponding to a total of 69 PTCs and 22 benign lesions. Among PTCs, 13 (18.8%) showed a RET rearrangement, and 11 (15.9%) of these carried an inversion (RET/PTC1 or RET/PTC3) in more than 10% of the nuclei examined. Activated forms of RET were also observed in three adenomas. RT-PCR analysis on the same samples confirmed the presence and the type of rearrangement predicted using FISH analysis. An interesting difference in the frequency and type of RET rearrangements was detected between the Italian and the French patients. Furthermore, we identified a putative novel type of rearrangement in at least one PTC sample. Several PTCs carried a significant number of cells characterized by a trisomy or a tetrasomy of chromosome 10. Overall, the FISH approach in interphase nuclei represents a powerful tool for detecting, at the single cell level, RET/PTC rearrangements and other anomalies involving the RET chromosome region. Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel
98	DR	10777380	NA
98	DR	10768832	Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) occurs sporadically (sMTC) or as part of the inherited cancer syndrome, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2). While the occurence of the MEN 2 syndrome is associated with mutations in the RET protooncogene, the reason for carcinogenesis in sMTC still remains unclear. Ras is a frequently mutated oncogene in a broad spectrum of human tumors and has been found in about 50% of follicular, papillary or anaplastic thyroid carcinomas. The purpose of this study was to determine, whether mutations in the ras oncogene could play a possible role in the carcinogenesis of sMTC. In this study we analyzed 15 sMTC for mutations in the hotspots codon 12, 13 and 61 of the H- and K-ras oncogene. We used the direct sequencing technique. In none of the examined tumors we were able to detect a mutation in the codon 12, 13 and 61 of the H-ras and K-ras oncogene. Based upon these results, we conclude that H- and K-ras do not play an important role in the carcinogenesis of sMTC.
98	DR	10748077	Specific germline mutations of the receptor tyrosine kinase, Ret, predispose to multiple endocrine neoplasia types 2A and 2B and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma. The mechanisms by which different Ret isoforms (Ret-2A and Ret-2B) cause distinct neoplastic diseases remain largely unknown. On the other hand, forced expression of these mutated versions of Ret induces the rat pheochromocytoma cell line, PC12, to differentiate. Here we used an inducible vector encoding a dominant-negative Ras (Ras p21(N17)) to investigate the contributions of the Ras pathway to the phenotype induced in PC12 cells by the expression of either Ret-2A or Ret-2B mutants. We show that the Ret-induced molecular and morphological changes are both mediated by Ras-dependent pathways. However, even though inhibition of Ras activity was sufficient to revert Ret-induced differentiation, the kinetics of morphological reversion of the Ret-2B- was more rapid than the Ret-2A-transfected cells. Further, we show that in Ret-transfected cells the suc1-associated neurotrophic factor-induced tyrosine phosphorylation target, SNT, is chronically phosphorylated in tyrosine residues, and associates with the Sos substrate. These results indicate the activation of the Ras cascade as an essential pathway triggered by the chronic active Ret mutants in PC12 cells. Moreover, our data indicate SNT as a substrate for both Ret mutants, which might mediate the activation of this cascade.
98	NR	10731788	Correia MJ, Lopes LO, Bugalho MJ, Cristina L, Santos AI, Bordalo AD, Pinho B, da Silva HL, Goncalves MD, Ribeiro C, Tuna JL.
98	DR	10720057	The ret/PTC rearrangements (PTC-1, PTC-2, and PTC-3) are characteristic of papillary thyroid cancer (PTC). In adults, PTC-1 is common and may be associated with an aggressive clinical course. The incidence and significance of ret/PTC mutations are less well understood in children. We examined spontaneous PTC from 33 patients (23 females and 10 males) with a median age of 18 yr (range, 6-21 yr) and a median follow-up of 3.5 yr (range, 0-13.4 yr). The ret/PTC mutations were identified in 15 tumors (45%), including 8 PTC-1 (8 of 15, 53%), 2 PTC-2 (2 of 15, 13%), 2 PTC-3 (2 of 15, 13%), and 3 (3 of 15, 20%) combined PTC mutations (PTC-1 and PTC-2). This distribution is significantly different (P = 0.001, by chi2 analysis) from that reported for children with radiation-induced PTC. There was no correlation between the presence or type of ret/PTC mutation and patient age, tumor size, focality, extent of disease at diagnosis, or recurrence. We conclude that ret/PTC mutations are 1) common in sporadic childhood PTC, 2) predominantly PTC-1, 3) frequently multiple, and 4) of different distribution than that reported for children with radiation-induced PTC.
98	NR	10697956	We recently isolated a novel cDNA, designated ELKS, that was fused to RET cDNA in a papillary thyroid carcinoma. Its encoded polypeptide sequence was rich in glutamic acid (E), leucine (L), lysine (K), and serine (S), and was characterized by the presence of nine alpha-helical coiled-coil domains consisting of periodic heptad repeats. We have now cloned the entire structure of the human ELKS gene from within a 700-kb genomic region represented by overlapping bacteriophage P1-derived artificial chromosome (PAC) and bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clones, and localized it to chromosomal band 12p13.3 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. The gene is approximately 500 kb long, with 19 exons and 18 introns; the transcription initiation site within exon 1 is separate from the initiation codon (in exon 2). Analysis of the exon/intron structure revealed that introns interrupt the coding sequence in such a way that many functional segments of the protein are encoded by distinct exons. Exon 1 encodes the 5' non-coding region; exons 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 14, and 15 encode the nine coiled-coil domains. Exons 17-19 constitute the 3' non-coding region. Analysis of the region immediately upstream of exon 1 showed that it was extremely rich in G/C nucleotides and contained multiple Sp-1 and AP2 binding sequences. The ELKS-RET gene fusion rearrangement we had observed in a papillary thyroid carcinoma occurred between intron 10 of the ELKS gene and intron 11 of RET.
98	DR	10691056	DNA testing is of great importance in families with multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 2A to identify non-mutant carrying family members and asymptomatic mutation carriers, and also to confirm the diagnosis in patients who already show clinical or biochemical signs of disease. Several point mutations of the RET proto-oncogene on exons 10 and 11 are associated with the disease, which is characterized by medullary thyroid carcinoma, pheochromocytoma and hyperparathyroidism. The aim of the present study was to develop and evaluate a simple method, which indicates the mutational status of members of families where the site of the point mutation is known. The method is illustrated by the detection of mutation TGC-->TAC of codon 611, which is one of the well-known mutations associated with MEN 2A. The method involves the PCR technique with allele-specific primers and detection of the amplified sequences with biotinylated probes. There was a clear-cut difference between the readings from affected and unaffected subjects. The subjects had been evaluated independently and all subjects harboring the mutation also had clinical disease. The method provides a simple and reliable diagnostic tool for DNA screening of members of families with a known mutation of the RET-gene.
98	PR	10686949	We report here the cytogenetic analysis of a follicular adenoma of the thyroid which revealed an abnormal clone with a t(X;10)(p22;q24) and a t(1;10)(q21;q11) together with normal cells. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with YACs 273E3 and 344H4, which are located on 10q11.2 and are specific for the RET protooncogene, showed no abnormalities. It would therefore appear that this gene is not involved in the particular tumor, as has been reported in a number of papillary thyroid carcinomas. Several chromosomal aberrations have been suggested as been specific for follicular thyroid adenoma. However, until now, only a few such cases have been reported which involve structural abnormalities of chromosomes 10q11.2 and 10q24. We believe this to be the first report of a follicular thyroid adenoma with a t(X;10)and a t(1;10).
98	DR	10679286	Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 2B mutations have been reported at methionine 918 or alanine 883 in the tyrosine kinase domain of the RET proto-oncogene. Recently, a new combination of two germline missense mutations at valine 804 and tyrosine 806 was identified in a patient with MEN 2B-like clinical phenotypes including medullary thyroid carcinoma, mucosal neuroma, and marfanoid habitus. In this case, valine 804 and tyrosine 806 were replaced with methionine and cysteine, respectively. In the present study, biological activities of RET with these new mutations were compared with those with known MEN 2A or MEN 2B mutations. The transforming activity of RET with the V804M/Y806C mutation was about 8- to 13-fold higher than that of RET with a single V804M or Y806C mutation. Like RET with the M918T or A883F MEN 2B mutation, the transforming activity of RET with the V804M/Y806C mutation was not affected by substitution of phenylalanine for tyrosine 905 that abolished the activity of RET with the MEN 2A mutation. On the other hand, substitution of phenylalanine for tyrosines 864 and 952 drastically diminished the activity of RET with the V804M/Y806C, M918T or A883F mutation, suggesting that these three mutant proteins have similar biological properties. Copyright 2000 Academic Press.
98	DR	10675330	Dominantly inherited multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B (MEN2B) is characterized by tumors of the thyroid C-cells and adrenal chromaffin cells, together with ganglioneuromas of the gastrointestinal tract and other developmental abnormalities. Most cases are caused by substitution of threonine for Met918 in the RET receptor tyrosine kinase, which is believed to convert the RET gene to an oncogene by altering the enzyme's substrate specificity. We report the production of a mouse model of MEN2B by introduction of the corresponding mutation into the ret gene. Mutant mice displayed C-cell hyperplasia and chromaffin cell hyperplasia progressing to pheochromocytoma. Homozygotes did not develop gastrointestinal ganglioneuromas, but displayed ganglioneuromas of the adrenal medulla, enlargement of the associated sympathetic ganglia and a male reproductive defect. Surprisingly, homozygotes did not display any developmental defects attributable to a loss-of-function mutation. Thus, while our results support the conclusion that the Met918Thr substitution is responsible for MEN2B, they suggest that the substrate specificity of the RET kinase does not interfere with its normal role in the development of the kidneys and enteric nervous system.
98	DR	10652352	The RET gene codes for a receptor tyrosine kinase that plays a crucial role during the development of both the enteric nervous system and the kidney. Germ line missense mutations at one of six codons specifying extracytoplasmic cysteines are responsible for two related cancer disorders as follows: multiple endocrine neoplasia type2A (MEN2A) and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC). MEN2A and FMTC mutations result in a constitutive catalytic activity and as a consequence convert RET into a dominantly acting transforming gene. Although it has been shown that RET-MEN2 mutants activate several transduction pathways, their respective contribution to the neoplastic phenotype remains poorly understood. Over the past few years, it has become increasingly clear that the transforming ability of several viral and cellular oncoproteins depends on their capacity to activate phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K). We now report that RET carrying a representative MEN2A mutation at Cys-634 (termed RET-MEN2A) activates PI3K and its downstream effector, the serine/threonine kinase AKT/protein kinase B. Previous studies have demonstrated that mutation of Tyr-1062, which is the intracellular docking site for Shc and Enigma on RET, abolishes the RET-MEN2A transforming activity. We provide evidence that mutation of Tyr-1062 abrogates the binding of the p85 regulatory subunit of PI3K to RET-MEN2A and the subsequent stimulation of the PI3K/AKT pathway. Furthermore, infection of rat fibroblasts with a retrovirus expressing a dominant-interfering form of PI3K suppresses RET-MEN2A-dependent transformation, whereas overexpression of AKT enhances the RET-MEN2A oncogenic potential. In summary, these data are consistent with the notion that RET-mediated cell-transforming effect is critically dependent on the activation of the PI3K/AKT pathway.
98	DR	10646883	The increase in thyroid carcinoma post-Chernobyl has been largely confined to a specific subtype of papillary carcinoma (solid/follicular). This subtype is observed predominantly in children under 10 in unirradiated populations, but maintains a high frequency in those aged 10-15 from those areas exposed to fallout from the Chernobyl accident. The aim of this study was to link morphology with molecular biology. We examined 106 papillary carcinomas from children under the age of 15 at operation. All were examined for rearrangements of the RET oncogene by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR); a subset of these cases were also examined for mutations of the three ras oncogenes, exon 10 of the thyroid stimulating hormone receptor, associated more usually with a follicular rather than papillary morphology, and exons 5, 6, 7 and 8 of the p53 gene, commonly involved in undifferentiated thyroid carcinoma. Rearrangements of the REToncogene were found in 44% of papillary carcinomas in which we studied fresh material; none of the tumours examined showed mutation in any of the other genes. The two rearrangements resulting from inversion of part of chromosome 10 (PTC1 and PTC3) accounted for the majority of RET rearrangements identified, with PTC1 being associated with papillary carcinomas of the classic and diffuse sclerosing variants and PTC3 with the solid/follicular variant.
98	NR	10628190	NA
98	DR	10626541	It is well recognized that the use of external irradiation of the head and neck to treat patients with various non-thyroid disorders increases their risk of developing papillary thyroid carcinoma years after radiation exposure. An increased risk of thyroid cancer has also been reported in survivors of the atomic bombs in Japan, as well as in Marshall Island residents exposed to radiation during the testing of hydrogen bombs. More recently, exposure to radioactive fallout as a result of the Chernobyl nuclear reactor accident has clearly caused an enormous increase in the incidence of childhood thyroid carcinoma in Belarus, Ukraine, and, to a lesser extent, in the Russian Federation, starting in 1990. When clinical and epidemiological features of thyroid carcinomas diagnosed in Belarus after the Chernobyl accident are compared with those of naturally occurring thyroid carcinomas in patients of the same age group in Italy and France, it becomes apparent that the post-Chernobyl thyroid carcinomas were much less influenced by gender, virtually always papillary (solid and follicular variants), more aggressive at presentation and more frequently associated with thyroid autoimmunity. Gene mutations involving the RET proto-oncogene, and less frequently TRK, have been shown to be causative events specific for papillary cancer. RET activation was found in nearly 70% of the patients who developed papillary thyroid carcinomas following the Chernobyl accident. In addition to thyroid cancer, radiation-induced thyroid diseases include benign thyroid nodules, hypothyroidism and autoimmune thyroiditis, with or without thyroid insufficiency, as observed in populations after environmental exposure to radioisotopes of iodine and in the survivors of atomic bomb explosions. On this basis, the authors evaluated thyroid autoimmune phenomena in normal children exposed to radiation after the Chernobyl accident. The results demonstrated an increased prevalence of circulating thyroid antibodies not associated with significant thyroid dysfunction. This finding is consistent with the short period of follow-up, but it is highly likely that these children will develop clinical thyroid autoimmune diseases in the future. Therefore, screening programmes for this at-risk population should focus, not only on the detection of thyroid nodules and cancer, but also on the development of thyroid autoimmune diseases.
98	DR	10622534	Germline mutations in the RET proto-oncogene are responsible for multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2A and 2B) and familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC). Point mutations or in-frame deletions of exons 10, 11, 13, 14 and 16 are associated with sporadic medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC). To understand further the role of the RET gene in sporadic MTC, we examined mutations in exons 12 and 15 of RET in patients with sporadic MTC. DNAs were extracted from 39 formalin-fixed tumor tissues and corresponding normal thyroid tissues or peripheral blood leukocytes. DNA sequencing was used to identify mutations in exons 12 and 15 of RET. In this study, one novel somatic mutation was found in exon 12 and five novel mutations or deletions were found in exon 15. Of the patients with mutations, one had an in-frame 12-bp deletion (nt. 2625-2636), one had point mutations in both codons 884 and 908, and the remaining three had point mutations in codons 748, 876 and 901, respectively. Together with our previous identification of somatic mutations in exons 10, 11, 13, 14 and 16, somatic alterations were found in 10 out of 39 (25.6%) sporadic MTCs. There was no association of RET gene mutations with tumor recurrence or prognosis. These results suggest that mutations occur frequently in the RET coding region in addition to the previously reported mutation hot spots, and there is a different spectrum of mutations between sporadic and hereditary MTC.
98	DR	10612852	NA
98	NR	10607373	To investigate the patterns of alkylating agent-induced tumour formation, 40 fish (Rivulus marmoratus) were exposed to N-methyl-N-nitrosourea (MNU) at 50 ppm in 10 mM Hepes-buffered synthetic seawater for 2 h. Tumour incidence 4 months after exposure was approximately 95%, and mainly papillary thyroid tumours were induced. For elucidating the molecular event in Rivulus papillary thyroid carcinogenesis, we first analysed for ras gene mutations based on the known ability of MNU to induce point mutations. The amplified R. Marmoratus Ha-and Ki-ras gene exon 1 and 2 regions were checked along with confirming the presence and expression patterns of the DNA repair gene O(6)-methylguanine alkyltransferase (O(6)-MT) and other oncogenes (c-src, c-fos, and c-myc). Ha- and Ki-ras genes from 38 tumour samples were tested for point mutations with direct sequencing but were not found to contain mutations. In this report, based on the lack of Ha- and Ki-ras gene mutations in papillary thyroid tumour induction in R. Marmoratus, we suggest that Ha- and Ki-ras gene-independent pathways such as ret/PTC rearrangements and other activations are involved in Rivulus papillary thyroid carcinogenesis. Teratogenesis Carcinog. Mutagen. 20:1-9, 2000. Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
98	DR	10597232	The RET/PTC3 rearrangement is formed by fusion of the ELE1 and RET genes, and is highly prevalent in radiation-induced post-Chernobyl papillary thyroid carcinomas. We characterized the breakpoints in the ELE1 and RET genes in 12 post-Chernobyl pediatric papillary carcinomas with known RET/PTC3 rearrangement. We found that the breakpoints within each intron were distributed in a relatively random fashion, except for clustering in the Alu regions of ELE1. None of the breakpoints occurred at the same base or within a similar sequence. There was also no evidence of preferential cleavage in AT-rich regions or other target DNA sites implicated in illegitimate recombination in mammalian cells. Modification of sequences at the cleavage sites was minimal, typically involving a 1-3 nucleotide deletion and/or duplication. Surprisingly, the alignment of ELE1 and RET introns in opposite orientation revealed that in each tumor the position of the break in one gene corresponded to the position of the break in the other gene. This tendency suggests that the two genes may lie next to each other but point in opposite directions in the nucleus. Such a structure would facilitate formation of RET/PTC3 rearrangements because a single radiation track could produce concerted breaks in both genes, leading to inversion due to reciprocal exchange via end-joining.
98	DR	10575840	We report a case of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B (MEN 2B) with de novo RET proto-oncogene mutation. The patient, a 23-year-old Taiwanese woman, was admitted for treatment of recurrent medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) 7 years after a total thyroidectomy. Mucosal neuromas and marfanoid appearance were also noted. Because MEN 2B was suspected, the patient and her family members underwent genetic analysis. A heterozygous germline mutation at codon 918 (ATG-->ACG) of the proto-oncogene RET was detected in the patient. This mutation was considered de novo, as it was not detected in either of her parents or her siblings. The patient underwent surgery for removal of the recurrent tumor. Although no pheochromocytoma was noted, regular follow-up is necessary because of persistent hypercalcitoninemia.
98	NR	10550306	Mixed medullary-follicular carcinomas (MMFCs) are tumors of the thyroid that display morphological and immunohistochemical features of both medullary and follicular neoplasms. The histogenetic origin and possible molecular mechanisms leading to MMFCs are still unclear. To address these questions, we have isolated the two histological components of 12 MMFCs by (laser-based) microdissection, analyzed them for mutations in the RET proto-oncogene and allelic losses of nine loci on six chromosomes, and studied the clonal composition of MMFCs in female patients. Our results provide strong evidence that the follicular and medullary components in MMFCs are not derived from a single progenitor cell, because the seven tumors amenable for analysis consistently exhibited a different pattern of mutations, allelic losses, and clonal composition. We also demonstrate that follicular structures in MMFCs are often oligo/polyclonal and more frequently exhibit hyperplastic than neoplastic histological features, indicating that at least a subset of MMFCs are composed of a medullary thyroid carcinoma containing hyperplastic follicles.
98	DR	10526879	Pheochromocytomas are rare neoplasias of the adrenal medulla which generally present with paroxysmal or sustained hypertension. Cardiogenic pulmonary edema is a common feature of these tumors, but few cases have been described with noncardiogenic pulmonary edema. We report a pheochromocytoma with the principle manifestation of noncardiogenic pulmonary edema and characterize a genetic lesion associated with the disorder. A 30-year-old man was admitted with abdominal pain and breathlessness. x-Ray examination of the chest revealed a massive, diffuse infiltration of the left lung without cardiomegaly. No paroxysmal blood pressure fluctuations or heart failure were evident during the entire course, and the infiltrate and dyspnea resolved in three days without inotropic or diuretic agents. Serum norepinephrine and epinephrine levels were elevated twenty and fifty times above normal, respectively. The patient was ultimately diagnosed with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN 2A). Mutations in the RET proto-oncogene have been described recently in patients with MEN 2A. Mutation analysis of selected RET exonic sequences identified a germline mutation at codon 634 in exon 11 of the RET proto-oncogene. The mutation introduces a transition encoding a non-conservative substitution from TGC (Cys) to CGC (Arg) and creates a novel restriction site recognized by HhaI. We further screened for this mutation among four of the proband's relatives by HhaI restriction analysis. One asymptomatic family member was identified who subsequently elected prophylactic total thyroid removal. Histological examination of this specimen confirmed the presence of medullary thyroid carcinoma.
98	DR	10522989	We report a novel case of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN 2A) associated with two mutations of the protooncogene RET. One affects codon 634 and causes a cysteine to arginine substitution; the second at codon 640 causes an alanine to glycine substitution in the transmembrane region. The two mutations were present on the same RET allele and were detected in germline and tumor DNA. Both mutations were de novo, i.e. they were not found in the DNA of the parents or relatives. Immunohistochemical and RT-PCR analysis showed that the pheochromocytoma expressed calcitonin as well as both RET alleles. A cell line established from the tumor and propagated in culture sustained the expression of RET and calcitonin, as did the original pheochromocytoma. Because the patient presented with medullary thyroid carcinoma and pheochromocytoma without parathyroid gland involvement, we speculate that this clinical picture could be correlated with the two RET mutations and to the unusual calcitonin production. This is the first report of a MEN 2A case due to two mutations of the RET gene and associated with a calcitonin-producing pheochromocytoma.
98	NR	10501663	NA
98	DR	10490816	Mutations of the RET gene, encoding a receptor tyrosine kinase, have been associated with the inherited cancer syndromes MEN 2A and MEN 2B. They have also further been associated with both familial and sporadic medullary thyroid carcinomas. Missense mutations affecting cysteine residues within the extracellular domain of the receptor causes constitutive tyrosine kinase activation through the formation of disulfide-bonded homodimers. We have recently reported that a somatic 6 bp in-frame deletion, originally coding for Glu632-Leu633, potently activates the RET gene. This activation is increased with respect to the frequent MEN 2A-associated missense mutation Cys634Arg. This finding specifically correlated to the clinic behavior of the corresponding tumor, which was characterized by an unusually aggressive progression with both multiple and recurrent metastases. By examining the possibility that this deletion acts in a manner similar to cysteine substitution, we have analysed the molecular mechanism by which this oncogenic activation occurs. Phosphorylated dimers of the deleted Ret receptor were detected in immunoprecipitates separated under non-reducing conditions. Like other Cys point mutations, this 6 bp deletion affecting two amino acid residues between two adjacent Cys, is capable of activating the transforming ability of Ret by promoting receptor dimerization. These results suggest that alteration to cysteine residue position or pairing is capable of inducing ligand independent dimerization. Furthermore, we present data demonstrating that the processing and sorting of the Ret membrane receptor to the cell surface is affected by mutation type.
98	DR	10489126	DNA extracted from the peripheral blood leukocytes of 36 members of five families with multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 2A was analyzed for mutations of exons 10, 11, 13, 14, and 16 of the RET proto-oncogene by nonisotopic polymerase chain reaction-single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis and automated DNA sequencing. Germline mutations were found in all 9 of the affected individuals and in 6 of the 27 individuals of unknown status. A 70-year-old man who had been completely asymptomatic before genetic diagnosis underwent left adrenalectomy and total thyroidectomy, and was found to have pheochromocytoma and multifocal micromedullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC). A 32-year-old man and a 15-year-old boy, with elevated calcitonin levels detected by the C-cell-stimulation test, but no evident thyroid tumor, underwent total thyroidectomy. Histopathological diagnosis revealed multiple micro MTCs. A 7-year-old girl without evidence of a thyroid tumor or an elevated calcitonin level is being followed up. The remaining two subjects with an evident thyroid tumor and elevated calcitonin levels refused surgery. These results suggest that genetic screening for MEN type 2 afflicted family members can facilitate the presymptomatic detection of gene carriers. Thus, we must carefully evaluate whether immediate prophylactic total thyroidectomy is indicated for gene carriers of MEN 2A without an evident thyroid tumor or elevated calcitonin levels.
98	DR	10484798	Two kindreds with familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) are described in which affected family members had variable clinical and pathologic manifestations. Genetic testing in 2 children from one kindred revealed a mutation in exon 10, codon 618 (TGC to AGC) in the extracellular cysteine-rich region of the RET gene. In this kindred an 11-year-old had microscopic evidence of MTC; however, a 17-year-old had no evidence of pathology on thyroidectomy. In a second kindred a rare mutation in exon 14, codon 804 (GTG to TTG) of the intracellular tyrosine kinase region of the RET gene was detected. In this kindred MTC has occurred in the 4th to 5th decades of life, with a clinical spectrum in mutation-positive family members ranging from no disease and C-cell hyperplasia to carcinoma with lymph node metastasis; a 7-year-old with the mutation and a normal response to provocative testing was also identified. Management recommendations in children from families with clearly defined familial MTC may be individualized to reflect emerging genotype-phenotype correlations.
98	NR	10474127	Serum calcitonin screening has recently been found to be a useful supplement to fine-needle aspiration biopsy, ultrasound and radionuclide imaging in the evaluation of thyroid nodules. We describe a case where introduction of routine calcitonin screening in nodular thyroid disease led to the detection of a family with medullary thyroid carcinoma. The benefits and problems of basal and stimulated serum calcitonin testing and ret-proto-oncogene mutation studies are exemplified and we discuss the appropriate use and interpretation of these tests. We conclude that routine basal serum calcitonin measurement in nodular thyroid disease and thoughtful use of ret-mutation analysis is cost-effective in detecting medullary thyroid carcinoma and multiple endocrine neoplasia type II.
98	DR	10463581	Activating mutations of the RET proto-oncogene cause hereditary medullary thyroid carcinoma. To examine whether selective inactivation of mutant RET could prevent transformation, a hammerhead ribozyme was designed to cleave RET mRNA containing a transforming mutation of codon 634 TGC --> TAC (Cys634Tyr). In vitro RNA cleavage assay demonstrated that the ribozyme selectively cleaved RET RNA with a Cys634Tyr but not Cys634Arg or the normal sequence. Expression of ribozyme in NIH/3T3 cells prevented RET-mediated colony formation in soft agar. This inhibition required catalytically active ribozyme and was specific for the TAC mutation. Therefore, ribozymes designed to selectively target mutant RET RNA may provide an effective therapeutic in the treatment of this syndrome.
98	DR	10462620	Background: Familial medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) is a form of type 2 multiple endocrine neoplasia in which individuals develop MTC as the sole phenotypic manifestation of their disease. A previous study has suggested that patients with familial MTC may have a later age of onset (and more indolent course) of MTC than is observed in individuals with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A. Methods and Results: The age-related penetrance of MRC, C-cell hyperlasia, and a positive pentagastrin test for carriers of a codon 609 mutation of the RET gene in a large MTC family was determined. Pentagastrin testing and surgical pathology findings for patients who had thyroidectomies were correlated with RET sequence analysis findings. The penetrance of this mutation for the development of MTC was 0% at age 20, 10% at age 20, 10% at age 30, 50% at age 45, and approximately 100% at age 60. The ages of onset of C-cell hyperplasia and a positive pentagastrin stimulation test were similar, and both preceded the age of onset of MTC. Carriers of the mutated gene in this family had a later age of onset of disease that has been reported for families with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A and 2B syndromes. Conclusions: These results may have implications for the clinical management of MTC families with a 609 mutation.
98	DR	10458257	The RET proto-oncogene, located on chromosome subband 10q11.2, encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase expressed in tissues and tumors derived from neural crest. Germline (present in every cell of the body) mutations in RET cause multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2), an inherited cancer syndrome characterized by medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), pheochromocytoma (PC), and hyperparathyroidism (HPT). This knowledge has allowed molecular diagnosis and presymptomatic DNA-based testing to become possible. RET testing is considered the standard of care in MEN 2 families because clinical decisions are made based on the results of such gene testing. There appears to be a correlation between specific RET mutation type and organ-specific tumor development. Such knowledge might be useful in tailoring targeted surveillance in the near future. Somatic (in the tumor only) RET mutations have been found in a proportion of sporadic MTCs and PCs. Whether the presence of somatic RET mutation is associated with a poor prognosis is currently being investigated as another tool for molecular medicine.
98	DR	10445857	Several mutations were identified in the kinase domain of the RET proto-oncogene in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) 2B, familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC) or sporadic medullary thyroid carcinoma. We introduced seven mutations (glutamic acid 768-->aspartic acid (E768D), valine 804-->leucine (V804L), alanine 883-->phenylalanine (A883F), serine 891-->alanine (S891A), methionine 918-->threonine (M918T), alanine 919-->proline (A919P) and E768D/A919P) into the short and long isoforms of RET cDNA and transfected the mutant cDNAs into NIH3T3 cells. The transforming activity of the long isoform of Ret with each mutation was much higher that that of its short isoform. Based on the levels of the transforming activity, these mutant RET genes were classified into two groups; a group with high transforming activity (A883F, M918T and E768D/A919P) and a group with low transforming activity (E768D, V804L, S891A and A919P) (designated high group and low group). Interestingly, the level of transforming activity correlated with clinical phenotypes; high group Ret with the A883F or M918T mutation and low group Ret with the E768D, V804L or S891A mutation were associated with the development of MEN 2B and FMTC, respectively. In addition, we found that substitution of phenylalanine for tyrosine 905 present in the kinase domain abolished both transforming and autophosphorylation activities of low group Ret whereas it did not affect the activities of high group Ret.
98	PR	10443680	Tyrosine kinase NTRK1 is expressed in neural and nonneuronal tissues. Like RET, NTRK1 is often activated by rearrangements that involve one of at least five other genes in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC). Because of similarities in involvement of the two tyrosine kinases RET (rearranged during transfection) and NTRK1 in the pathogenesis of PTC, the obvious parallels between RET and NTRK1 and between PTC and medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), NTRK1 seemed to be an excellent candidate gene to play a role in the genesis of MTC. Single-strand conformational polymorphism analysis of 16 exons of NTRK1, from 31 sporadic MTC, revealed variants in five exons (exons 4 and 14-17). Sequence analysis demonstrated one sequence variant each in exons 4, 14, 16, and 17, and four different variants in exon 15. Differential restriction enzyme digestion specific for each variant confirmed the sequencing results. All variants were also present in the corresponding germline DNA. Interestingly, the sequence variants at codon 604 (c1810C>T) and codon 613 (c1838G>T) ofexon 15 always occurred together and might represent linkage disequilibrium. The frequencies of the sequence variants in germline DNA from patients with sporadic MTC did not differ significantly from those in a race-matched control group. Although we did not find any somatic mutations of NTRK1 in sporadic MTC, the single-strand conformational polymorphism conditions reported here, together with the knowledge of the frequency of various sequence variants, may help in future mutation analyses of DNA from other neural and nonneural tissues.
98	DR	10442282	NA
98	DR	10426588	RET is a receptor tyrosine kinase expressed in neuroendocrine cells and tumors. RET is activated by a ligand complex comprising glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and GDNF receptor-alpha (GDNFR-alpha). Activating mutations of the RET proto-oncogene were found in multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) 2 and in sporadic medullary thyroid carcinoma and pheochromocytoma of neuroendocrine origin. Mutations of the RET proto-oncogene and the glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) gene were examined in human pituitary tumors. No mutations of the RET proto-oncogene including the cysteine-rich region or codon 768 and 918 in the tyrosine kinase domain were detected in 172 human pituitary adenomas either by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) or by PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP). Further, somatic mutations of the GDNF gene in 33 human pituitary adenomas were not detected by PCR-SSCP. One polymorphism of the GDNF gene at codon 145 of TGC or TGT was observed in a prolactinoma. The RET proto-oncogene message was detected in a normal human pituitary gland or 4 of 4 human pituitary adenomas with reverse transcription (RT)-PCR, and in rodent pituitary tumor cell lines with Western blotting. The expression of GDNF gene was detected in 1 of 4 human somatotroph adenomas, 1 of 2 corticotroph adenomas, and 2 of 6 rodent pituitary tumor cell lines with RT-PCR. Based on these, it is concluded that somatic mutations of the RET proto-oncogene or the GDNF gene do not appear to play a major role in the pituitary tumorigenesis in examined tumors.
98	NR	10422141	NA
98	DR	10401675	The RET gene encodes a tyrosine kinase receptor for neurotrophic molecules. RET is a conceptually valuable example of how different mutations of a single gene may cause different diseases. Gene rearrangements activate the oncogenic potential of RET in human thyroid papillary carcinomas. On the other side, different point mutations activate RET in familial multiple endocrine neoplasia syndromes. Finally, inactivating mutations of RET can be present in Hirschsprung's disease patients. The detailed knowledge of the specific RET mutations responsible for human tumors provides relevant tools for the clinical management of these diseases. Moreover, the recent discovery of the growth factors which in vivo stimulate its signaling may shed new light on the role played by RET in the development and differentiation of the central and peripheral nervous system.
98	PR	10393829	NA
99	DR	14723818	OBJECTIVE: For the purpose of clarifying the influence of thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) gene single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on the efficacy of thiopurines and risk for its toxicity and therefore improving the safety and efficacy of thiopurines, the authors investigated TPMT genotype in acute leukemia in children who were intolerant to the treatment with 6-mercap topurine (6-MP). METHODS: TPMT genotype was determined in an unrelated population of 250 Chinese healthy blood donors and 280 children with acute leukemia. TPMT genotyping assay was based on polymerase chain reaction (PCR), restriction digestion of PCR products, denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) and direct DNA sequencing in the TPMT * 2 (G238C), TPMT * 3A (G460A, A719G) and TPMT * 3C (A719G). RESULTS: There were 10 TPMT * 1/TPMT * 3C heterozygotes in 280 children. The frequency of the polymorphism was 3.6%. All the involved alleles were TPMT * 3C. Of the 160 children acute leukemia evaluated, 45 (26%) were intolerant to 6-MP. Presentations included hepatotoxicity and hematological toxicity. Six out of 45 children were heterozygous, while the other 39 were wild type homozygous. Before dosage adjustments for thiopurine, the hematologic toxicity and hepatotoxicity in TPMT heterozygous individuals occurred more frequently than in homozygous. Therefore, cases of TPMT heterozygotes experienced more missed doses of 6-MP. CONCLUSIONS: TPMT genotype is associated with tolerance in acute leukemia in children. The heterozygote individuals have low TPMT activity. Therefore the frequencies of hemtopoietic toxicity and hepatoxicity are high after using 6-MP. Detection of SNPs in the TPMT genes is useful in identifying children before administration of 6-MP.
99	DR	14705861	Pharmacogenetics fields of research was initially restricted to drug metabolism enzymes. It has recently progressed to drug transporters, receptors, and any kind of targets that can modulate drug response. This rapid extension of pharmacogenetics to all the different medical specialties is in close relation with the recent completion of the draft sequence of the human genome and the discovery that about 0.1% of its sequence is polymorphic. The goal of pharmacogenetics for the next years is clearly to determine the clinical consequences of these 2-3 million single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Things can be schematically divided in two situations. (1) Frequent SNPs (allele frequency > 10%) which have a low impact on drug response (odds ratios < 2), even combined with other SNPs in haplotype combinations. Such situations, which are by far the most frequent, have no clinical relevance for a single patient to predict its response to a particular drug. CYP3A and MDR1 allelic variants are good examples of such frequent situations. (2) Rare SNPs, which dramatically alter the expression or the activity of a target protein, can sometimes have a real clinical relevance (odds ratios > 5), usually to predict drug side effects. Only few examples, such as TPMT and CYP2C9 genetic polymorphisms, can illustrate this rare situation. Unfortunately, less than 1% of the population is concerned by these rare SNPs, and genotyping can only explain a small part of the variability of the response to a single drug. Beside the impressive mass of data available for pharmacogenetics, it is surprising to observe its poor development in routine medical practice. This discrepancy relies mainly on educational and methodological problems, which might be solved in the decade. To promote pharmacogenetics in routine medical practice, large prospective randomized trials are needed to demonstrate that pharmacogenetic orientated prescription can sometimes predict drug response without dramatic increase in costs.
99	NR	14671489	NA
99	NR	14671488	NA
99	DR	14656901	BACKGROUND: Interindividual differences in therapeutic efficacy in patients treated with thiopurines might be explained by the presence of thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT) alleles that encode for reduced TPMT enzymatic activity. It is therefore of value to know an individual's inherent capacity to express TPMT. Method: We developed a pyrosequencing method to detect 10 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in TPMT. A Swedish population (n = 800) was examined for TPMT*3A, TPMT*3B, TPMT*3C, and TPMT*2. Patients with inflammatory bowel disease (n = 24) and healthy volunteers (n = 6), selected on the basis of TPMT enzymatic activity, were investigated for all 10 SNPs to determine the relationship between TPMT genotype and phenotype. RESULTS: In the general population we identified the following genotypes with nonfunctional alleles: TPMT*1/*3A (*3A allelic frequency, 3.75%), TPMT*1/*3C (*3C allelic frequency, 0.44%), TPMT*1/*3B (*3B allelic frequency, 0.13%), and TPMT*1/*2 (*2 allelic frequency, 0.06%). All nine individuals with normal enzymatic activity were wild-type TPMT*1/*1. Thirteen individuals with intermediate activity were either TPMT*1/*3A (n = 12) or TPMT*1/*2 (n = 1). Eight individuals with low enzymatic activity were TPMT*3A/*3A (n = 4), TPMT*3A/*3C (n = 2), or TPMT*1/*3A (n = 2). CONCLUSION: Next to wild type, the most frequent alleles in Sweden are TPMT*3A and TPMT*3C. A previously established phenotypic cutoff for distinguishing normal from intermediate metabolizers was confirmed. To identify the majority of cases (90%) with low or intermediate TPMT activity, it was sufficient to analyze individuals for only 3 of the 10 SNPs investigated. Nevertheless, this investigation indicates that other mutations might be of relevance for decreased enzymatic activity.
99	PR	14651577	Azathioprine is a valuable agent in the treatment of severe childhood atopic eczema. Thiopurine methyl transferase (TPMT) exhibits autosomal codominant polymorphism and plays an important role in the metabolism of azathioprine. In most large population groups studied to date, approximately 10% of the population had intermediate activity due to heterozygosity at the TPMT locus, and about 0.33% were TPMT deficient. TPMT deficiency results in the accumulation of thioguanine nucleotides and cytotoxic 6-mercaptopurine metabolites. Previously it was considered unsafe to treat this group with azathioprine because of what was considered to be an unacceptably high risk of toxicity (profound myelosuppression). Better understanding of the pharmacogenetics of purine metabolism has changed this, and with appropriate dose adjustments, individuals who have a partial TPMT deficiency (heterozygotes) can now be treated with thiopurines. It seems probable that these individuals are more likely to have a therapeutic response while being at lower risk of developing dose-related hepatotoxicity because of the reduced doses required to effect a therapeutic response. Two patients with severe refractory atopic eczema, both of whom had a partial TPMT deficiency, have had an excellent response to treatment with azathioprine. They were treated with half-standard doses and response to treatment occurred within 2 weeks.
99	NR	14641571	The genome of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 encodes an unexpected capacity to tolerate heavy metals and metalloids. The availability of the complete chromosomal sequence allowed the categorization of 61 open reading frames likely to be involved in metal tolerance or homeostasis, plus seven more possibly involved in metal resistance mechanisms. Some systems appeared to be duplicated. These might perform redundant functions or be involved in tolerance to different metals. In total, P. putida was found to bear two systems for arsenic (arsRBCH), one for chromate (chrA), four to six systems for divalent cations (two cadA and two to four czc chemiosmotic antiporters), two systems for monovalent cations: pacS, cusCBA (plus one cryptic silP gene containing a frameshift mutation), two operons for Cu chelation (copAB), one metallothionein for metal(loid) binding, one system for Te/Se methylation (tpmT) and four ABC transporters for the uptake of essential Zn, Mn, Mo and Ni (one nikABCDE, two znuACB and one mobABC). Some of the metal-related clusters are located in gene islands with atypical genome signatures. The predicted capacity of P. putida to endure exposure to heavy metals is discussed from an evolutionary perspective.
99	DR	14633779	The outcome for children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) has improved dramatically with current therapy resulting in an event free survival exceeding 75% for most patients. However significant challenges remain including developing better methods to predict which patients can be cured with less toxic treatment and which ones will benefit from augmented therapy. In addition, 25% of patients fail therapy and novel treatments that are focused on undermining specifically the leukemic process are needed urgently. In Section I, Dr. Carroll reviews current approaches to risk classification and proposes a system that incorporates well-established clinical parameters, genetic lesions of the blast as well as early response parameters. He then provides an overview of emerging technologies in genomics and proteomics and how they might lead to more rational, biologically based classification systems. In Section II, Drs. Mary Relling and Stella Davies describe emerging findings that relate to host features that influence outcome, the role of inherited germline variation. They highlight technical breakthroughs in assessing germline differences among patients. Polymorphisms of drug metabolizing genes have been shown to influence toxicity and the best example is the gene thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) a key enzyme in the metabolism of 6-mercaptopurine. Polymorphisms are associated with decreased activity that is also associated with increased toxicity. The role of polymorphisms in other genes whose products play an important role in drug metabolism as well as cytokine genes are discussed. In Sections III and IV, Drs. James Downing and Cheryl Willman review their findings using gene expression profiling to classify ALL. Both authors outline challenges in applying this methodology to analysis of clinical samples. Dr. Willman describes her laboratory's examination of infant leukemia and precursor B-ALL where unsupervised approaches have led to the identification of inherent biologic groups not predicted by conventional morphologic, immunophenotypic and cytogenetic variables. Dr. Downing describes his results from a pediatric ALL expression database using over 327 diagnostic samples, with 80% of the dataset consisting of samples from patients treated on a single institutional protocol. Seven distinct leukemia subtypes were identified representing known leukemia subtypes including: BCR-ABL, E2A-PBX1, TEL-AML1, rearrangements in the MLL gene, hyperdiploid karyotype (i.e., > 50 chromosomes), and T-ALL as well as a new leukemia subtype. A subset of genes have been identified whose expression appears to be predictive of outcome but independent verification is needed before this type of analysis can be integrated into treatment assignment. Chemotherapeutic agents kill cancer cells by activating apoptosis, or programmed cell death. In Section V, Dr. John Reed describes major apoptotic pathways and the specific role of key proteins in this response. The expression level of some of these proteins, such as BCL2, BAX, and caspase 3, has been shown to be predictive of ultimate outcome in hematopoietic tumors. New therapeutic approaches that modulate the apoptotic pathway are now available and Dr. Reed highlights those that may be applicable to the treatment of childhood ALL.
99	DR	14610243	A common genetic polymorphism for thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT) is a major factor responsible for individual variation in the toxicity and therapeutic efficacy of thiopurine drugs in humans. We set out to determine whether inheritance might also influence the level of TPMT activity in the domestic cat, Felis domesticus. As a first step, red blood cell (RBC) TPMT activity was measured in blood samples from 104 cats. The average level of cat RBC TPMT activity was lower than that observed in humans and was not related to either age or sex of the animal. We then cloned and characterized the F. domesticus TPMT cDNA and gene. Genotype-phenotype correlation analysis was performed by resequencing the cat TPMT gene using DNA samples from 12 animals with high and 12 with low levels of RBC TPMT activity. Thirty-one single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were observed in these 24 DNA samples, including five that altered the encoded amino acid, resulting in nine allozymes (six observed and three inferred). Twelve of the 31 feline TPMT SNPs were associated, collectively, with 56% of the variation in level of RBC TPMT activity in these 24 animals. When those 12 SNPs were assayed in all 89 cats for which DNA was available, 30% of the variation in level of RBC TPMT activity was associated with these 12 polymorphisms. After expression in COS-1 cells, five of the eight variant cat allozymes displayed decreased levels of both TPMT activity and immunoreactive protein compared with the wild-type allozyme. These observations are compatible with the conclusion that inheritance is an important factor responsible for variation in levels of RBC TPMT activity in the cat. They also represent a step toward the application of pharmacogenetic principles to companion animal thiopurine drug therapy.
99	DR	14576848	The genetic polymorphism of thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) is one of the most developed examples of pharmacogenetics, spanning from molecular genetics to clinical diagnostics for individualizing thiopurine therapy (i.e. azathioprine, mercaptopurine, and thioguanine). Elucidation of the molecular mechanisms and biochemical consequences of TPMT deficiency demonstrates how pharmacogenetic traits can be identified, characterized, and translated to the bedside. Insights gained from studies of the TPMT polymorphism illustrate the potential of pharmacogenomics to optimize cancer therapy by avoiding toxic side effects in genetically distinct subgroups of patients.
99	PR	14574377	NA
99	DR	14566029	Azathioprine (AZA) is widely used in the management of rheumatological diseases. Despite its efficacy, AZA can often cause bone marrow suppression, notably leucopenia, which has been recorded in up to 17% of patients taking AZA for rheumatoid arthritis, though this can be considered clinically significant in about 3% overall. Severe myelosuppression, associated with abnormal AZA metabolism, is linked to the thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) genetic polymorphism. TPMT status can be assessed prior to AZA treatment by measuring enzyme activity or genotyping techniques. Analysis of recent data suggests that by optimizing the AZA dose on the basis of TPMT status testing (with a substantial reduction in dose for patients homozygous for mutant TPMT alleles), a reduction in drug-induced morbidity and cost savings can be made by avoiding hospitalization and rescue therapy for leucopenic events. In this article we review the pharmacogenetic and clinical implications of the TPMT polymorphism, emphasizing its relevance to rheumatologists managing diseases with AZA.
99	PR	14556746	In humans, the enzyme thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) metabolizes 6-thiopurine (6-TP) medications, including 6-thioguanine, 6-mercaptopurine and azathioprine, commonly used for immune suppression and for the treatment of hematopoietic malignancies. S-Methylation by TPMT prevents the intracellular conversion of these drugs into active 6-thioguanine nucleotides (6-TGNs). Genetic polymorphisms in the TPMT protein sequence have been associated with decreased tissue enzymatic activities and an increased risk of life-threatening myelo-suppression from standard doses of 6-TP medications. Biochemical studies have demonstrated that TPMT deficiency is primarily associated with increased degradation of the polymorphic proteins through an ubiquitylation and proteasomal-dependent pathway. We have now determined the tertiary structure of the bacterial orthologue of TPMT from Pseudomonas syringae using NMR spectroscopy. Bacterial TPMT similarly catalyzes the S-adenosylmethionine (SAM)-dependent transmethylation of 6-TPs and shares 45% similarity (33% identity) with the human enzyme. Initial studies revealed an unstructured N terminus, which was removed for structural studies and subsequently determined to be required for enzymatic activity. Despite lacking sequence similarity to any protein of known three-dimensional structure, the tertiary structure of bacterial TPMT reveals a classical SAM-dependent methyltransferase topology, consisting of a seven-stranded beta-sheet flanked by alpha-helices on both sides. However, some deviations from the consensus topology, along with multiple insertions of structural elements, are evident. A review of the many experimentally determined tertiary structures of SAM-dependent methyltransferases demonstrates that such structural deviations from the consensus topology are common and often functionally important.
99	DR	14508387	Genetic polymorphism of TPMT activity is an important factor responsible for large individual differences in thiopurine toxicity and therapeutic efficacy. The aim of this study was to determine the distribution of TPMT activity as well as the types and frequencies of mutant alleles in a Bulgarian population sample. TPMT activity was measured in 313 Bulgarians, using an established HPLC procedure. All individuals with TPMT activity less than 12.0 nmol/(mL Ery.h) (n = 76) were additionally genotyped using a color multiplex hybridization assay. The samples were tested for TPMT*2, *3A, *3B, *3C, *3D, *4, and *6 mutant alleles. TPMT activities varied from 1.1 to 24.0 nmol/(mL Ery.h) [mean 14.2 +/- 3.2 nmol/(mL Ery.h)]: 92.3% of the individuals investigated had high TPMT activity [>10 nmol/(mL Ery. h)], whereas 7.4% were intermediate [2.8-10 nmol/(mL Ery.h)], and 0.3% were low metabolizers [< 2.8 nmol/(mL Ery.h)]. A significant gender-related difference in TPMT activity (P = 0.02) was observed with 6.2% higher values in men than in women. There was no significant correlation between age and enzyme activity (r = 0.06, P = 0.27). Genotype analysis revealed three mutant TPMT alleles: 2, 3A, and 3C. The frequency of these alleles among the TPMT-deficient individuals was 2.17%, 30.4%, and 2.17%, respectively. These data show a similar distribution of TPMT activity among the Bulgarian population investigated as in most other white populations with the frequency of intermediate metabolizers being somewhat lower (7.4% versus approximately 11%) in the Bulgarians. The most common variant allele was TPMT-3A, as in other white populations.
99	PR	14502119	The elimination of azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine is greatly influenced by polymorphisms in the enzymes responsible for their metabolism. Patients who are deficient in thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) are at an increased risk for azathioprine- and 6-mercaptopurine-induced toxicities because of the accumulation of toxic metabolites, and patients with high TPMT activity may not receive maximum benefit because of the increased clearance. Therefore, routine TPMT genotyping prior to the initiation of azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine therapy should be considered to decrease the risk of severe and possibly preventable adverse effects and to identify patients who might benefit from higher doses. However, measuring the TPMT activity at baseline is not a substitute for monitoring white blood cell counts throughout therapy because drug therapy and/or other conditions may still cause myelosuppression in these patients.
99	DR	12972954	Thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT) catalyses the S-methylation of thiopurine drugs such as 6-mercaptopurine. A common genetic polymorphism for TPMT is associated with large individual variations in thiopurine drug toxicity and therapeutic efficacy. TPMT*3A, the most common variant allele in Caucasians, has two alterations in amino acid sequence, resulting in striking decreases in TPMT protein levels. This phenomenon results, in part, from rapid degradation through a ubiquitin-proteasome-mediated process. We set out to test the hypothesis that chaperone proteins might be involved in targeting TPMT for degradation. As a first step, hsp90, hsp70 and the cochaperone hop were immunoprecipitated from a rabbit reticulocyte lysate (RRL) that included radioactively labelled *3A and wild-type TPMT. TPMT*3A was much more highly associated with all three chaperones than was the wild-type enzyme. The RRL was also used to confirm the accelerated degradation of *3A compared to wild-type TPMT. Treatment of RRL with the hsp90 inhibitor geldanamycin resulted in enhanced association of hsp90 with wild-type TPMT, an observation that correlated with accelerated ubiquitin-dependent degradation of wild-type TPMT. Geldanamycin treatment of COS-1 cells transfected with FLAG-tagged wild-type also resulted in a time and geldanamycin concentration-dependent decrease in TPMT activity and protein, which was compatible with results obtained in the RRL. These observations indicate that TPMT is a client protein for hsp90 and suggest that chaperone proteins, especially hsp90, are involved in targeting both TPMT*3A and, in the presence of geldanamycin, the wild-type allozyme for degradation. Therefore, chaperone proteins play an important mechanistic role in this clinically significant example of pharmacogenetic variation in drug metabolism.
99	PR	12940924	BACKGROUND: Azathioprine and mercaptopurine (MP) are well established treatments for inflammatory bowel disease but they have severe adverse effects that prevent their use in some patients. The likelihood and type of adverse effect may relate to thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) enzyme activity and genotype. AIM: To compare the TPMT genotype frequencies in patients with inflammatory bowel disease who have had severe adverse effects to those who tolerate azathioprine or MP (controls). METHODS: Patients with inflammatory bowel disease who had been treated with azathioprine or MP in Christchurch between 1996 and 2002 were identified. Patients with adverse effects, and controls, were invited to provide a peripheral blood sample for analysis of TPMT genotype. The genotype frequencies were then compared between the two groups. RESULTS: Fifty-six patients were identified with adverse effects requiring cessation of therapy, of which 50 were genotyped. Reactions included allergic-type (25%), hepatitis (33%), nausea/vomiting (14%), bone marrow suppression (10%), pancreatitis (6%) and other (12%). Five of 50 patients with reactions had TPMT genotype *1/*3, one had *3/*3, and the rest had the wildtype genotype *1/*1. The patient with genotype *3/*3 had severe pancytopenia requiring hospitalization. Three of 50 controls had the *1/*3 genotype and the rest were *1/*1. CONCLUSIONS: The TPMT allele frequency in our population with inflammatory bowel disease is similar to that reported elsewhere. There was a slight trend for more frequent TPMT mutations in the patients with adverse reactions, but this was not statistically significant. Most patients with reactions did not have gene mutations.
99	DR	12835738	NA
99	PR	12814323	Thiopurine drug metabolism is a quintessential case of pharmacogenetics. A wealth of experimental and clinical data on polymorphisms in the thiopurine metabolizing enzyme thiopurine methyl transferase (TPMT) has been generated in the past decade. Pharmacogenetic testing prior to thiopurine treatment is already being practiced to some extent in the clinical context, and it is likely that it will be among the first pharmacogenetic tests applied on a regular basis. We analyzed the published TPMT data and identified some lessons to be learned for the future implementation of pharmacogenetics for thiopurines as well as in other fields. These include the need for comprehensive and unbiased data on allele frequencies relevant to a broad range of populations worldwide. The nature and frequency of TPMT gene polymorphisms in some ethnic groups is still a matter of speculation, as the vast majority of studies on TPMT allele distribution are limited to only a small subset of alleles and populations. Secondly, an appreciation of the limits of pharmacogenetics is warranted, as pharmacogenetic testing can help in avoiding some, but by far not all adverse effects of drug therapy. An analysis of six clinical studies correlating adverse thiopurine effects and TPMT genotype revealed that an average of 78% of adverse drug reactions were not associated with TPMT polymorphisms. Pharmacogenetic testing will thus not eliminate the need for careful clinical monitoring of adverse drug reactions. Finally, a careful approach toward dose increases for patients with high enzyme activity is necessary, as TPMT-mediated methylation of thiopurines generates a possibly hepatotoxic byproduct.
99	NR	12755967	NA
99	NR	12747605	The number of polymorphisms identified in genes encoding drug metabolising enzymes, drug transporters, and receptors is rapidly increasing. In many cases, these genetic factors have a major impact on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of a particular drug and thereby influence the sensitivity to such drug in an individual patient with a certain genotype. The highest impact is seen for drugs with a narrow therapeutic index, with important examples emerging from treatment with antidepressants, oral anticoagulants, and cytostatics, which are metabolised by the polymorphic enzymes cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6), cytochrome P450 2C9 (CYP2C9), and thiopurine-S-methyltransferase (TPMT), respectively. In order to apply the increasing amount of pharmacogenetic knowledge to clinical practise, specific dosage recommendations based on genotypes will have to be developed to guide the clinician, and these recommendations will have to be evaluated in prospective clinical studies. Such development will lead to a patient-tailored drug therapy which hopefully would be more efficient and will result in fewer adverse drug reactions.
99	PR	12746731	NA
99	DR	12684587	6-mercaptopurine (6-MP) and its parent drug azathioprine (AZA) have been proven to be effective for both steroid-dependent and chronically active, or steroid-resistant inflammatory bowel disease, as well as for the prevention of relapse. Concerns about toxicity, delayed onset of action, and therapeutic failure (1 out of 3 patients) have restricted their use. Recent pharmacogenetic advances have led to the development of novel strategies to optimize and individualize therapy with AZA and 6-MP, maximizing efficacy while minimizing toxicity. We have defined a range of optimal therapeutic 6-MP metabolite levels, as well as an association of metabolite levels with medication-induced toxicity and the genotype of the main catabolic enzyme, thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT). Measurement of 6-MP metabolite levels and TPMT molecular analysis provide clinicians with useful tools for optimizing therapeutic response to 6-MP/AZA, as well as for identifying individuals at increased risk for drug-induced toxicity.
99	DR	12618310	Heterogeneity in patient response to chemotherapy is consistently observed across patient populations. Pharmacogenomics is the study of inherited differences in interindividual drug disposition and effects, with the goal of selecting the optimal drug therapy and dosage for each patient. Pharmacogenomics is especially important for oncology, as severe systemic toxicity and unpredictable efficacy are hallmarks of cancer therapies. In addition, genetic polymorphisms in drug metabolizing enzymes and other molecules are responsible for much of the interindividual differences in the efficacy and toxicity of many chemotherapy agents. This review will discuss clinically relevant examples of gene polymorphisms that influence the outcome of cancer therapy, and whole-genome expression studies using microarray technology that have shown tremendous potential for benefiting cancer pharmacogenomics. The power and utility of the mouse as an experimental system for pharmacogenomic discovery will also be discussed in the context of cancer therapy.
99	PR	12588628	There is increasing information available on the existence of polymorphisms in genes encoding xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes and the functional significance of many of these. In addition to genes long recognized as being polymorphic, such as CYP2D6, CYP2C19 and CYP2C9, there is now information available on the existence of polymorphisms in other cytochrome P450 genes such as CYP2A6, CYP2B6 and CYP2C8. With respect to phase II metabolism, polymorphisms in GSTM1, GSTT1, NAT2 and TPMT are well understood but information is also emerging on other GST polymorphisms and on polymorphisms in the UDP-glucuronosyltransferases and sulfotransferases. The availability of comprehensive information on the occurrence and functional significance of polymorphisms affecting drug metabolism should facilitate their application to pharmacogenomic profiling.
99	DR	12525681	Interindividual variability in the efficacy and toxicity of drug therapy is associated with polymorphisms in genes encoding drug-metabolizing enzymes, transporters, or drug targets. Pharmacogenetics aims to identify individuals predisposed to high risk of toxicity from conventional doses of cancer chemotherapeutic agents. We review the role of genetic polymorphisms in UGT1A1 and TPMT, as well as mutations in DPD, in influencing drug disposition and toxicity. Recent studies show that pharmacogenetic determinants may also influence treatment outcomes. We discuss the clinical significance of polymorphisms in TS, MTHFR, and FCGR3A, as well as the polymorphic DNA repair genes XPD and XRCC1, in influencing response to chemotherapy and survival outcomes. Finally, the potential implications of transporter pharmacogenetics in influencing drug bioavailability are addressed.
99	DR	12509611	OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the presence of thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) alleles associated with reduced or absent activity of thiopurine methyltransferase is a major factor for withdrawal of azathioprine (AZA) in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients. METHODS: The TPMT genotype, including the variable number of tandem repeats (VNTR) pattern in the 5' untranslated region, was analysed in 111 patients with long-standing RA. Azathioprine (AZA) therapy was used in 40 patients (36%) as a disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drug. RESULTS: Seven out of 111 RA patients (6.3%) were carriers of a mutant allele, TPMT3A (G(460)-->A, A(719)-->G) being the mutant allele observed most frequently. In the group of 40 AZA-treated patients, therapy was discontinued in six patients because of side-effects and in 26 patients because of lack of efficacy. Three patients presented moderate side-effects and were homozygous for the wild-type TPMT allele, whereas the remaining three patients, who developed gastrointestinal effects with severe nausea and vomiting, were TPMT3A carriers. CONCLUSION: In this observational study, the absence of response, probably due to the low-dose scheme used, was the major cause of AZA withdrawal in our series of RA patients. TPMT genotyping may allow the use of high doses of AZA in patients with normal TPMT alleles to improve the efficacy of this immunosuppressive drug. Our data support the relationship between gastrointestinal intolerance and thiopurine metabolic imbalance.
99	DR	12465143	OBJECTIVE: Thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT), which catalyzes the inactivation of azathioprine (AZA), exhibits genetic polymorphism that results in dose related, serious toxicities (mainly hematological cytopenias) in 10-15% of individuals treated with AZA. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests provide a sensitive, specific means of prospectively identifying these patients before AZA therapy and minimizing toxicity through dosage reduction. Our objective was to model the cost effectiveness of the 2 alternative AZA treatment strategies in rheumatologic conditions: (1) utilizing PCR to determine polymorphisms leading to TPMT deficiencies prior to AZA therapy with a reduction in dose; and (2) no testing. The analysis was conducted from a third party payer perspective over one year. METHODS: A decision analytic model was applied to map the costs and outcomes of patients under both strategies. Data applied to the model included the positive and negative predictive values of the PCR, the probabilities of adverse events due to AZA, and the costs associated with their management. Sources of data included published clinical trials, diagnostic test evaluations, surveillance trials, and economic evaluations. RESULTS: Dose related toxicities resulted in AZA discontinuation rates of 10-20%. The usual dosing strategy cost $677 Cdn per patient, whereas the genotype directed dosing strategy cost $663 Cdn per patient. In the genotype dosing strategy, the number needed to treat to avoid one adverse event over 6 months was 20. Thus, the genotype based dosing strategy dominated the usual dosing strategy. One-way sensitivity analyses revealed that the estimates were robust to ranges of +/- 30% for the costs, the properties of the PCR test, and the probability of adverse events. CONCLUSION: The introduction of PCR testing to identify TPMT polymorphisms prior to AZA treatment may represent good value in certain health care settings.
99	DR	12464800	Thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT) plays an important role in the metabolism of thiopurine drugs. In humans, a common genetic polymorphism for TPMT is a major factor responsible for individual variation in the toxicity and therapeutic efficacy of these drugs. Dogs (Canis familiaris) are also treated with thiopurine drugs and, similar to humans, they display large individual variations in thiopurine toxicity and efficacy. We set out to determine whether dogs might also display genetically determined variation in TPMT activity. As a first step, we observed that canine red blood cell (RBC) TPMT activity in samples from 145 dogs varied over a nine-fold range. That variation was not associated with either the age or sex of the animal. Subsequently, we cloned the canine TPMT cDNA and gene. The canine cDNA encoded a protein that was 81.2% identical to the enzyme encoded by the most common TPMT allele in humans. A genotype-phenotype correlation analysis was performed by resequencing the canine gene using DNA samples from 39 animals selected for high, low or intermediate levels of RBC TPMT activity. We observed nine polymorphisms in these 39 DNA samples, including three insertion/deletion events and six single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), one of which was a nonsynonymous cSNP (Arg97Gln). However, when the variant allozyme at codon 97 was expressed in COS-1 cells, it did not display significant differences in either basal levels of TPMT activity or in substrate kinetics compared with the wild-type allozyme. Six of the nine canine TPMT polymorphisms were associated with 67% of the variation in level of RBC TPMT activity in these 39 blood samples. When those six SNPs were assayed using DNA from all 145 animals studied, 40% of the phenotypic variance in the entire population sample could be explained by these polymorphisms. Therefore, inheritance is a major factor involved in the regulation of variation in RBC TPMT in the dog, just as it is in humans. These observations represent a step towards the application of pharmacogenetic and pharmacogenomic principles to companion animal drug therapy.
99	DR	12269967	BACKGROUND: Azathioprine therapy is discontinued in one-third of patients with inflammatory bowel disease because of toxicity or a lack of clinical response. Patients with thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) deficiency are intolerant to azathioprine, whilst carriers are at increased risk of side-effects. AIM: To evaluate the importance of TPMT activity in the management of azathioprine therapy in inflammatory bowel disease. METHODS: Clinical response, adverse effects and haematological parameters were determined and correlated with TPMT enzyme activity and genotype in 106 patients with inflammatory bowel disease. RESULTS: Ninety-six patients had high TPMT activity, and 10 had intermediate activity. Nineteen patients (18%) were intolerant to azathioprine. Fifteen (16%) of those with high TPMT activity were intolerant, compared with five (50%) with intermediate activity [odds ratio (OR), 5.4; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.5-19.8]. Complete remission was achieved in 63% of cases, and complete or partial remission in 79%. Interestingly, very high TPMT activity (> 14 units/mL red blood cells) was significantly associated with non-response, irrespective of the time on azathioprine (OR, 0.21; 95% CI, 0.07-0.68). TPMT gene mutations correlated with TPMT activity. CONCLUSIONS: Inflammatory bowel disease patients with intermediate TPMT activity have an increased risk of azathioprine toxicity. Conversely, very high TPMT activity predicts treatment failure. TPMT genotype predicted TPMT phenotype in this study.
99	PR	12228189	Cephalosporin antibiotics with structures that include the heterocyclic leaving group 1-methyltetrazole-5-thiol (MTT) can cause hypoprothrombinemia and hemorrhage as a result of MTT-dependent inhibition of the gamma-carboxylation of glutamate. The structure of cefazolin also includes a heterocyclic thiol, 2-methyl-1,3,4-thiadiazole-5-thiol (MTD), and this compound can also inhibit the gamma-carboxylation of glutamate. However, unlike MTT, which is known to be present in vivo after the administration of drugs that include this structure, there have been no reports that MTD is present in vivo after cefazolin administration. We set out to determine whether MTD might be present in the tissues of patients treated with cefazolin prior to surgery. To do that, we took advantage of the fact that heterocyclic thiols can undergo S-methylation catalyzed by the genetically polymorphic drug-metabolizing enzyme thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT). Initially, we tested recombinant human TPMT as a "reagent" to S-methylate MTD. MTD was a substrate for TPMT-catalyzed S-methylation, with an apparent K(m) value of 63 micro M. Recombinant TPMT, with [(14)C-methyl]S-adenosyl-L-methionine as a cosubstrate, was then used to radioactively label a methyl acceptor substrate present in liver and kidney cytosol preparations from patients who had been treated preoperatively with cefazolin. Pooled renal cytosol from 10 of those patients was used to purify and isolate the methylated product by reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography. That methylated compound coeluted with S-methyl MTD. When the methylated product was subjected to tandem mass spectrometry, it was identified as S-methyl MTD. Therefore, MTD is present in the tissues of patients treated with cefazolin. These observations also raise the possibility that the TPMT genetic polymorphism may represent a risk factor for cefazolin-induced hypoprothrombinemia since subjects who genetically lack TPMT would be unable to catalyze this MTD biotransformation pathway.
99	DR	12217596	BACKGROUND/AIMS: Toxicity and efficacy of azathioprine is governed partly by the activity of thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT). Azathioprine has been used for many years, with corticosteroids or alone, for the treatment of autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) but no studies of TPMT phenotype and genotype in relation to response to the drug in AIH have been published. METHODS: Erythrocyte TPMT activities were measured by a radioincorporation assay in 72 consecutive outpatients with AIH, 53 of whom were genotyped for the commonest defective alleles in Europeans (TPMT*3A, *3B and *3C) by restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis. RESULTS: TPMT activities were significantly lower in patients intolerant of azathioprine (group I, n=15) than in those who sustained remission on azathioprine alone (group II, n=28; P=0.003) and those who tolerated azathioprine but continued to require corticosteroids (group III, n=29; P<0.0001), and were higher in group III than in group II (P=0.034). Ten patients with defective alleles (all heterozygotes) had significantly lower TPMT activities (P=0.002). However, in 25% there was discordance between phenotype and/or genotype and response to azathioprine. CONCLUSIONS: TPMT phenotyping or genotyping may be advisable before institution of azathioprine therapy in AIH but neither approach invariably predicts response to the drug.
99	DR	12172211	The efficacy of the immunosuppressants azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine has been well established in the therapy of inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD). However, its use has been complicated by a high incidence of serious adverse drug reactions such as hematotoxicity, hepatotoxicity, pancreatitis and gastrointestinal disturbances. Whereas azathioprine-related pancytopenia has been clearly linked to thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT) polymorphism limited data are available to explain gastrointestinal side effects. In a retrospective analysis of 93 adults with IBD and azathioprine therapy both phenotyping and genotyping was used to explore systematically the relationship between TPMT and azathioprine-related adverse reactions. At time of inclusion, 69 patients were still receiving azathioprine therapy and had never experienced side effects. Azathioprine had been withdrawn in 10 patients for non-medical reasons or lack of response and 14 patients (15%) had stopped medication or were on reduced dose due to severe azathioprine-related side effects. Nine of these 14 patients had developed gastrointestinal side effects (hepatotoxicity, n = 3; pancreatitis, n = 3; others, n = 3), but their normal red blood cell TPMT activities were in accordance to TPMT wild-type. TPMT deficiency in one patient had led to pancytopenia whereas only two of the remaining four patients with hematotoxicity displayed an intermediate phenotype of TPMT. This study demonstrates that azathioprine-related gastrointestinal side effects are independent of the TPMT polymorphism. Nevertheless pharmacogenetic testing for TPMT prior to commencing thiopurine therapy should become routine practice in order to avoid severe hematotoxicity in TPMT deficient patients and lowering the incidence of hematological side effects in individuals heterozygous for TPMT.
99	DR	12172209	NA
99	DR	12136641	Clinically important genetic polymorphisms influencing drug metabolism and drug response have typically been discovered on the basis of phenotypic differences among individuals from different populations. Routine genotyping before drug therapy may enable the identification of responders, nonresponders, or patients at increased risk of toxicity. Automated, high-throughput detecting methods for single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are highly desirable in many clinical laboratories. The aim of this study is to develop a high-throughput genotyping method for detecting SNPs influencing drug response in the Japanese population. We have developed three real-time PCR assays for detecting SNPs in the human drug-metabolizing enzymes and drug targets. The assay for simultaneously detecting CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C9, CYP2C18, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, CYP3A5, NAT2, TPMT, DPYD, UGT1A1, ALDH2, ADH2, MDR1, CETP, DCP-1, ADRB2, HTR2A, INPP1, SDF1, and mitochondrial DNA polymorphisms takes less than 1.5 h. With the clinical application of NAT2 genotyping, we found statistically significant difference between the incidence of adverse drug reactions (ADRs) and the NAT2 genotype. The incidence of the ADRs was significantly higher in the slow type than the in other two types, as 5 of the 6 patients were of the slowtype, and the other was the intermediatetype, while no patients of the rapidtype has developed any ADRs.
99	PR	12119546	Pharmacogenomics, a revolutionary chapter in the history of pharmacology, has received new impetus from the development and accessibility of molecular biotechnologies, notably DNA chips. The longstanding notion of responders/non-responders has given way to a more organic approach, where idiosyncrasy becomes an obsolete concept. This is a major step towards predictive, individualized medicine. In this review, several applications of pharmacogenomics are considered. Genetic polymorphisms of metabolization reactions, mainly with cytochrome P450, explain most of the cases described today. More fundamental and innovative studies have tried to link the structure of receptors or transporters and drug response. A leading topic in neuropsychopharmacology is the relation between the polymorphism of dopaminergic receptors and the efficacy of, or adverse reaction to, neuroleptics. In asthma, the structure of the beta2-adrenergic receptor has been associated with response to treatment. Intrinsic genetic predisposition also plays an important role in cardiovascular diseases, and the role of ion channel mutations will be discussed. Research in oncological molecular epidemiology has explored the connection between the predisposition to certain cancers and specific enzymatic equipment hindering the detoxification of potentially carcinogenic exogenous compounds, or, on the contrary, promoting metabolic activation implicated in the formation of reactive compounds. The search for determinants of addictive behavior is another vast field of pharmacogenomics. Finally, we consider the impact of pharmacogenomics on the methodology of drug development in preclinical and clinical trials. Progress in methods of phenotyping/genotyping should promote diagnosis, guide the choice of drug for an individual (benefit/risk ratio), and determine dosage and regimen.
99	PR	12113035	The main genetic polymorphisms affecting the metabolism and transport of cytotoxic drugs are discussed in this review. Likely future approaches to pharmacogenetics and emerging technologies, such as tumor classification using microarray analysis, are also considered.
99	PR	12043054	BACKGROUND: The majority of chemotherapeutic agents are administered at fixed doses that are close to those maximally tolerated. MATERIAL AND METHODS: This review is based on current knowledge about the metabolism of thiopurines and the clinical implications of genetic polymorphism in thiopurine-S-methyltransferase (TPMT). RESULTS: Intracellularly thiopurines, e.g. 6-MP, are anabolized to cytotoxic 6-thioguanine nucleotides (6-TGN) that are incorporated into DNA and RNA. A competing pathway is S-methylation of 6-MP and its initial nucleotide metabolites by TPMT. In childhood acute lymphocytic leukaemia, high erythrocyte concentrations of 6-TGN correlate with the degree of leukopenia and a good prognosis, while low concentrations appear to be associated with higher risk of relapse. In most populations studied, approximately 10% have intermediate TPMT activity and 1/300 lacks TPMT activity due to one or two mutant TPMT alleles, respectively. INTERPRETATION: Phenotyping or genotyping may be used to identify patients as deficient or intermediate thiopurine metabolizers. This suggests that they should receive a profound or moderate reduction in dosage to avoid haematopoietic toxicity.
99	DR	12021625	This study examined the role of thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) polymorphism in the metabolism and clinical effects of azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine in the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease and childhood leukemia. The current hypothesis is that the cytotoxic effects of thiopurines are caused by the incorporation of thioguanine nucleotides into DNA. In this context, S-methylation catalyzed by TPMT can be regarded as a competing metabolic pathway. The authors assayed the TPMT activity in red blood cells from 122 patients treated with azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine (83 adults with inflammatory bowel disease and 39 children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia) and in 290 untreated controls (219 adult blood donors and 71 children). The concentrations of thioguanine nucleotides and methylthioinosine monophosphate were also assayed in red blood cells from the patients.The TPMT activity and the concentrations of methylthioinosine monophosphate and thioguanine nucleotides were higher in children than in adults. All children but no adult patient received concomitant methotrexate. Interaction between methotrexate and 6-mercaptopurine has been described, and may explain the results. Low TPMT activity in adult patients with inflammatory bowel disease correlated to an increased incidence of adverse drug reactions. However, there was no correlation between TPMT activity and the red blood cell concentrations of methylthioinosine monophosphate or thioguanine nucleotides, or between the concentrations of these metabolites and the occurrence of adverse effects. The results show that the role of thiopurine metabolism for drug effects is complex.
99	NR	11927101	BACKGROUND: Azathioprine, off-label used long time ago to treat multiple sclerosis (MS) patients, has recently received approval from the Spanish Medicine Agency (Agencia Espanola del Medicamento) in relapsing-remitting (RR) forms of this condition. Clinical efficacy of azathioprine is due to the enzymatic conversion to 6-thioguanine (the active metabolite). The key enzyme in this process is thio purine methyl transferase (TPMT), converting 6-MP to 6-methylMP. A specific genetic polymorphism has been described affecting this enzyme. With the aim of optimizing purine therapy in a variety of autoimmune diseases, monitoring of TPMT phenotype has been performed in a vast number of patients. The TPMT activity frequency distribution histogram from a Spanish population sample has been compared with the corresponding ones to Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis and MS patients. METHODS AND RESULTS: TPMT activity has been studied in red blood cells obtained from 3,640 clinical laboratory samples in Spain of which 1,249 corresponded to patients affected by Crohn's disease, 589 to ulcerative colitis, 348 to MS, 487 to several autoimmune diseases apart from the previously mentioned and 967 to a group of blood donors. The mean TPMT activity in the MS group (17.1 6.1 U/ml) was significantly lower (p < 0.001) than in Crohn's disease (20.0 5.8 U/ml), ulcerative colitis (19.7 6.1 U/ml) and donors group (19.9 6.3 U/ml). CONCLUSION: Defective methylation profile and subsequent hyperhomocysteinemia leading to a widespread impairment of the methyl-transferase activity (in this case affecting MBP methylation) is a vicious circle we propose as a MS susceptibility factor.
99	PR	11905809	Pharmacogenetics is the study of how genetic variations affect drug response. These variations can affect a patient's response to cancer drugs, for which there is usually a fine line between a dosage that has a therapeutic effect and one that produces toxicity. Gaining better insight into the genetic elements of both the patient and the tumour that affect drug efficacy will eventually allow for individualized dosage determination and fewer adverse effects.
99	PR	11834908	NA
99	DR	11822749	BACKGROUND: The efficacies and toxicities of anticancer agents vary greatly among patients. This is attributable to the activities of drug-metabolizing enzymes and membrane transporters, primarily determined by polymorphisms of the functions of genes encoding these proteins. DESIGN: We reviewed the available literature on drug-metabolizing enzymes and membrane transporters, especially their physiological functions, genetic and functional polymorphisms, and involvement in metabolism, pharmacokinetics and toxicity of anticancer agents. RESULTS: Nine enzymes metabolizing anticancer agents have been shown to have genetic polymorphisms: dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase, cytochrome P450, NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1, N-acetyltransferase 2, thiopurine methyltransferase, glutathione S-transferase, and uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase. Decreased activities of these proteins can cause not only inherited metabolic disorders, but also extraordinarily severe toxicity in cancer patients given chemothearpy. Transporter proteins mediate cellular uptake and secretion of organic anions and cations. These proteins have recently been shown to play critical roles in the clearance of anticancer agents, although relations between patients' genetics backgrounds and the clinical significance of drug actions are poorly understood. CONCLUSIONS: Further studies should be focused on dosing and selection of anticancer agents, based on the type and extent of metabolic variation among individuals, in order to avoid adverse reactions and therapeutic failure.
99	DR	11783509	NA
99	PR	11728416	BACKGROUND: Pharmacogenetics is the science of the influence of heredity on pharmacological response. ISSUES: The cost of severe adverse drug reactions in individuals has been estimated in the US alone to be in excess of US$4 billion. It has been argued that in a significant proportion of cases, the efficacy and toxicity profiles of drug therapy would be substantially improved in individuals if characteristics due to genetic variation were taken into account. Methods are now available, which make screening for susceptibility feasible. CONCLUSIONS: There are several therapeutic areas in which screening may give rise to significant improvements in outcome with cost-benefits to both the individual and the community. However, there is currently a lack of data on which cost-benefit analysis can be based. The challenge is to provide this information for new drugs, and for drugs with established therapeutic roles.
99	PR	11720061	Much of the individual variation in drug response is due to genetic drug metabolic polymorphisms. Clinically relevant examples include acetylator status; cytochrome P450 2D6, 2C9 and 2C19 polymorphisms; and thiopurine methyltransferase deficiency. It is important to be aware of which drugs are subject to pharmacogenetic variability. In the future, population-based pharmacogenetic testing will allow more individualized drug treatment and will avoid the current empiricism.
99	DR	11701642	It is well recognized that most medications exhibit wide interpatient variability in their efficacy and toxicity. For many medications, these interindividual differences are due in part to polymorphisms in genes encoding drug metabolizing enzymes, drug transporters, and/or drug targets (e.g., receptors, enzymes). Pharmacogenomics is a burgeoning field aimed at elucidating the genetic basis for differences in drug efficacy and toxicity, and it uses genome-wide approaches to identify the network of genes that govern an individual's response to drug therapy. For some genetic polymorphisms (e.g., thiopurine S-methyltransferase), monogenic traits have a marked effect on pharmacokinetics (e.g., drug metabolism), such that individuals who inherit an enzyme deficiency must be treated with markedly different doses of the affected medications (e.g., 5%-10% of the standard thiopurine dose). Likewise, polymorphisms in drug targets (e.g., beta adrenergic receptor) can alter the sensitivity of patients to treatment (e.g., beta-agonists), changing the pharmacodynamics of drug response. Recognizing that most drug effects are determined by the interplay of several gene products that govern the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of medications, pharmacogenomics research aims to elucidate these polygenic determinants of drug effects. The ultimate goal is to provide new strategies for optimizing drug therapy based on each patient's genetic determinants of drug efficacy and toxicity. This chapter provides an overview of the current pharmacogenomics literature and offers insights for the potential impact of this field on the safe and effective use of medications.
99	DR	11681411	6-Mercaptopurine (6-MP) is metabolized by thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT), an enzyme subject to genetic polymorphism. We investigated the relationships between the TPMT locus (TPMT activity and genotype) and the pharmacological response to 6-MP during maintenance therapy of 78 children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). For each patient, 6-MP dosage, leukocyte counts and occurrence of infectious episodes were monitored on an 8 week basis. Higher 6-MP dosage was associated with higher TPMT activity (P = 0.03) and higher average leukocyte counts (P < 0.01). Eight patients (10%) carrying a TPMT mutant genotype (one homozygous and seven heterozygous) received lower 6-MP doses (average: 48 vs 65 mg/m2/day; P = 0.02) and had on average lower leukocyte counts (2834 vs 3398 cells/mm3; P = 0.003) than patients carrying the wild-type TPMT genotype. Higher occurrence of infectious episodes graded 2 or 3 was correlated with higher 6-MP dosage (P < 0.01) but no difference was observed between TPMT mutants and TPMT wild-type patients. Patients who received 6-MP dosage above the group median (62 mg/m2/day) or having a TPMT activity above the group median (21.5 nmol/h/ml) had a higher percentage of 8 week periods with infectious episodes requiring treatment (34% vs 17% and 33% vs 19%, respectively) than those with 6-MP dose or TPMT activity below the group median (P < 0.01). In the last 25 patients enrolled in the study, steady-state erythrocyte thioguanine nucleotide (TGN) concentrations were associated with lower leukocyte counts (P= 0.01) but not with a higher occurrence of infectious episodes. In contrast, higher steady-state erythrocyte methylmercaptopurine nucleotide (MeMPN) concentrations were associated with higher 6-MP dosage (P< 0.01) and higher occurrence of infectious episodes (P < 0.001). In conclusion, during maintenance therapy of ALL, children with higher TPMT activity receive a higher 6-MP dosage and may have infectious episodes caused by metabolism of 6-MP into methylmercaptopurine nucleotides.
99	PR	11569125	NA
99	PR	11479220	Thioguanine and mercaptopurine are prodrugs requiring conversion into thiopurine nucleotides to exert cytotoxicity. Thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT), an enzyme subject to genetic polymorphism, catabolizes thiopurines into inactive methylated bases, but also produces methylthioguanine nucleotides and methylmercaptopurine nucleotides from thioguanine and mercaptopurine nucleotides, respectively. To study the effect of TPMT on activation versus inactivation of mercaptopurine and thioguanine, we used a retroviral gene transfer technique to develop human CCRF-CEM cell lines that did (TPMT+) and did not (MOCK) overexpress TPMT. After transduction, TPMT activities were 14-fold higher in the TPMT+ versus the MOCK cell lines (P < 0.001). TPMT+ cells were less sensitive to thioguanine than MOCK cells (IC(50) = 1.10+/- 0.12 microM versus 0.55 +/- 0.19 microM; P = 0.02); in contrast, TPMT+ cells were more sensitive to mercaptopurine than MOCK cells (IC(50) = 0.52 +/- 0.20 microM versus 1.50 +/- 0.23 microM; P < 0.01). The lower sensitivity of TPMT+ versus MOCK cells to thioguanine was associated with lower thioguanine nucleotide concentrations (917 +/- 282 versus 1515 +/- 183 pmol/5 x 10(6) cells; P = 0.01), higher methylthioguanine nucleotide concentrations (252 +/- 34 versus 27 +/- 10 pmol/5 x 10(6) cells; P = 0.01), less inhibition of de novo purine synthesis (13 versus 95%; P < 0.01), and lower deoxythioguanosine incorporation into DNA (2.0 +/- 0.6% versus 7.2 +/- 2.0%; P < 0.001). The higher sensitivity of TPMT+ cells to mercaptopurine was associated with higher concentrations of methylmercaptopurine nucleotide (2601 +/- 1055 versus 174 +/- 77 pmol/5 x 10(6) cells; P = 0.01) and greater inhibition of de novo purine synthesis (>99% versus 74%; P < 0.01) compared with MOCK cells. We conclude that methylation of mercaptopurine contributes to the antiproliferative properties of the drug, probably through inhibition of de novo purine synthesis by methylmercaptopurine nucleotides, whereas thioguanine is inactivated primarily by TPMT.
99	DR	11337943	NA
99	DR	11304783	PURPOSE: To assess thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT) phenotype and genotype in patients who were intolerant to treatment with mercaptopurine (MP) or azathioprine (AZA), and to evaluate their clinical management. PATIENTS AND METHODS: TPMT phenotype and thiopurine metabolism were assessed in all patients referred between 1994 and 1999 for evaluation of excessive toxicity while receiving MP or AZA. TPMT activity was measured by radiochemical analysis, TPMT genotype was determined by mutation-specific polymerase chain reaction restriction fragment length polymorphism analyses for the TPMT*2, *3A, *3B, and *3C alleles, and thiopurine metabolites were measured by high-performance liquid chromatography. RESULTS: Of 23 patients evaluated, six had TPMT deficiency (activity < 5 U/mL of packed RBCs [pRBCs]; homozygous mutant), nine had intermediate TPMT activity (5 to 13 U/mL of pRBCs; heterozygotes), and eight had high TPMT activity (> 13.5 U/mL of pRBCs; homozygous wildtype). The 65.2% frequency of TPMT-deficient and heterozygous individuals among these toxic patients is significantly greater than the expected 10% frequency in the general population (P <.001, chi(2)). TPMT phenotype and genotype were concordant in all TPMT-deficient and all homozygous-wildtype patients, whereas five patients with heterozygous phenotypes did not have a TPMT mutation detected. Before thiopurine dosage adjustments, TPMT-deficient patients experienced more frequent hospitalization, more platelet transfusions, and more missed doses of chemotherapy. Hematologic toxicity occurred in more than 90% of patients, whereas hepatotoxicity occurred in six patients (26%). Both patients who presented with only hepatic toxicity had a homozygous-wildtype TPMT phenotype. After adjustment of thiopurine dosages, the TPMT-deficient and heterozygous patients tolerated therapy without acute toxicity. CONCLUSION: There is a significant (> six-fold) overrepresentation of TPMT deficiency or heterozygosity among patients developing dose-limiting hematopoietic toxicity from therapy containing thiopurines. However, with appropriate dosage adjustments, TPMT-deficient and heterozygous patients can be treated with thiopurines, without acute dose-limiting toxicity.
99	DR	11259360	Thiopurine drugs are used to treat patients with neoplasia and autoimmune disease as well as transplant recipients. These agents are metabolized, in part, by S-methylation catalyzed by thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT). The discovery nearly two decades ago that levels of TPMT activity in human tissues are controlled by a common genetic polymorphism led to one of the best examples of the potential importance of pharmacogenetics for clinical medicine. Specifically, it is now known that patients with inherited very low levels of TPMT activity are at greatly increased risk for thiopurine-induced toxicity such as myelosuppression when treated with standard doses of these drugs, while subjects with very high activity may be undertreated. Furthermore, recent reports indicate that TPMT may be the target for clinically significant drug interactions and that this common genetic polymorphism might be a risk factor for the occurrence of therapy-dependent secondary leukemia. In parallel with these clinical reports, the molecular basis for the TPMT polymorphism has been determined as a result of cloning and characterization of the human TPMT cDNA and gene. Those advances led to the description and characterization of a series of single nucleotide polymorphisms that result in low levels of enzyme activity as well as a polymorphic variable number tandem repeat within the 5'-flanking region of the TPMT gene that may "modulate" level of enzyme activity. As a result of these observations, the TPMT genetic polymorphism represents a model system for the way in which basic pharmacogenetic information is developed and applied to clinical medicine.
99	NR	11186004	NA
99	DR	11179762	The level of expression of the enzyme thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) is an important determinant of the metabolism of drugs used both in the treatment of acute leukaemia (6-mercaptopurine and 6-thioguanine) and as an immunosuppressant in patients with autoimmune diseases or following organ transplantation (azathioprine). Studies of enzyme activity in red blood cells have shown that TPMT expression displays genetic polymorphism with 11% of individuals having intermediate and one in 300 undetectable levels. Patients with biallelic mutations and undetectable enzyme activity suffer life-threatening myelosuppression when treated with conventional doses of these drugs. Patients with intermediate activity have an increased risk of drug-associated toxicity. In the Caucasian populations studied to date, intermediate activity is associated with mutations at two sites of the TPMT gene, G460A and A719G (designated TPMT*3A), in 80% of cases. Detection of these mutations has, to date, been based on the analysis of restriction digests of PCR products. In order to simplify this process we have investigated the ability of denaturing high pressure liquid chromatography (DHPLC) to detect the A719G mutation. DHPLC of PCR products from 15 known heterozygotes (TPMT*3A/TPMT*1) and 18 known homozygotes (TPMT*1/TPMT*1) gave a clear pattern difference between the groups and 100% concordance with the results of restriction digests. These results suggest DHPLC represents a valuable technique for accurate and rapid detection of pharmacologically important mutations in the TPMT gene.
99	DR	11134802	NA
99	PR	11097342	Significant fractions of health budgets must be spent for treatment of drug side effects and for inefficient drug therapy. Hereditary variants in drug metabolizing enzymes, drug transporters, and drug targets are important determinants of drug response and toxicity and may therefore aid in selection and dosage of drugs. Today there is extensive knowledge of genetic polymorphisms of cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes 2A6, 2C9, 2C19, and 2D6; of phase-2 enzymes such as thiopurine S-methyltransferase; and more recently of drug transporters such as the MDR-1 gene-product P-glycoprotein, affecting a significant share of currently used drugs. However, application of pharmacogenetic knowledge to clinical routine is limited in current practice. To promote the application of pharmacogenetic knowledge in clinical routine, research on genotype-based dose adjustments is still necessary - as is the promotion of faster and cheaper genotype analyses. Furthermore, the benefits of CYP genotype-directed drug therapy should be evaluated in properly designed prospective studies. Once such steps have been successfully taken, drug therapy could well become more prevention-directed and patient-tailored than it is possible today, replacing the current "one drug in one dose for one disease" strategy by a more individualized approach.
99	DR	11093885	BACKGROUND: Azathioprine is an immunosuppressor drug widely used in the treatment of autoimmune diseases. Adverse effects during treatment are related to the activity of thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT), an enzyme which plays a role in azathioprine metabolism. The presence of the allelic variants of the TPMT gene allows us to classify patients into three different groups: high, moderate and low risk of myelosuppression after receiving standard doses of azathioprine. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Study of the allelic variants of the TPMT gene in the positions 460 and 719 with PCR methods in a patient with Crohn's disease, who developed aplasia after receiving azathioprine. The study was extended to his relatives. RESULTS: The patient under study carried the most frequent variant allele of the TPMT gene associated with low enzymatic activity. The mother and one sister of the patient were also carriers of this allelic variant. CONCLUSIONS: Genotyping the allelic variants of the TPMT gene is a useful method to identify patients at moderate or high risk of myelosuppression after administration of azathioprine.
99	NR	11041238	We have developed an allele-specific fluorogenic 5' nuclease chain reaction assay for detecting polymorphisms in the following human drug-metabolizing enzyme genes: CYP2C9 (CYP2C9*2 and *3), CYP2C19 (CYP2C19*2 and *3), CYP2D6 (CYP2D6*4, *10, *14, *18, and *21(C8)), N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2*5B, *6A, and *7B), thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT*3C), and aldehyde dehydrogenase2 (ALDH2*2). This method is a marriage of two emerging technologies, the use of allele-specific amplification primers for target DNA and hybridization of the TaqMan probe. The TaqMan probe is labeled with both a fluorescent reporter dye and a quencher dye. Genotypes are separated according to the different threshold cycles of the wild-type and mutant primers. All assays are performed using a single thermocycling protocol. This genotyping method is rapid and highly sensitive and yields a high throughput. It could be applied toward automated large-scale genotyping.
99	NR	11012121	Azathioprine is a purine analogue used as an immunosuppressive and immunomodulator agent in various mammals, including cats. Several adverse reactions have been reported and have limited the use of the drug in the cat. Adverse reactions to azathioprine in humans have been correlated with reduced activity of thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) in erythrocytes. The purpose of this preliminary study was to determine if cats have TPMT activity in their erythrocytes and to compare the values obtained with the normal range for humans and the normal range for dogs in a preliminary report. Activity of the enzyme was measured in blood samples drawn from 41 cats. Blood also was taken from 5 dogs. The mean erythrocyte TPMT activity in the cats was 2.4 +/- 0.4 nmol (range, 1.2-3.9 nmol) per hour per milliliter of red blood cells (U/mL RBC) or 2-8 nmol per hour per gram of hemoglobin (U/g Hb). This range was far lower than the normal human range (8-15 U/mL RBC; 16-33 U/g Hb) and was of monopolar distribution. This observation apparently precludes any diagnostic purpose in assaying erythrocyte TPMT in this species. Erythrocyte TPMT activity in the 5 dogs ranged from 5.5 to 13.1 U/mL RBC (11-27 U/g Hb), which was comparable with normal and carrier ranges for humans, but proof of TPMT genetic polymorphism in either species will require genotyping studies.
99	NR	10997970	S-Methylation by thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) is an important route of metabolism for the thiopurine drugs. About one in 300 individuals are homozygous for a TPMT mutation associated with very low enzyme activity and severe myelosuppression if treated with standard doses of drug. To validate the use of molecular genetic techniques for the detection of TPMT deficiency, we have determined red blood cell TPMT activity in 240 adult blood donors and 55 normal children. Genotype was determined by restriction fragment length analysis of polymerase chain reaction products in a cohort of 79 of the blood donors and five cases of azathioprine-induced myelosupression, and this confirmed a close relationship between genotype and phenotype. In 17 of the 24 cases in which mutations were found, DNA was also available from remission bone marrow. In one of these cases, DNA from the remission marrow sample indicated the presence of a non-mutated allele that had not been seen in the blast DNA sample obtained at presentation. These results indicate that polymerase chain reaction-based assays give reliable and robust results for the detection of TPMT deficiency, but that caution should be exercised in relying exclusively on DNA obtained from lymphoblasts in childhood leukaemia.
99	DR	10971199	The activity of thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT) is inherited as an autosomal co-dominant trait. In most large world populations studied to date, approximately 10% of the population have intermediate activity due to heterozygosity at the TPMT locus, and about 0.33% is TPMT deficient. TPMT is now one of the most well characterized genetic polymorphisms of drug metabolism, with the genetic basis having been well defined in most populations, providing molecular strategies for studying this genetic polymorphism in human and experimental models. Three mutant alleles, TPMT(*)2, TPMT(*)3A and TPMT(*)3C, account for the great majority of mutant alleles in all human populations studied to date. Significant ethnic differences occur in the frequencies of these mutant alleles. Progress in DNA analysis has made it practical to use genotyping techniques for the molecular diagnosis of TPMT deficiency and heterozygosity, thereby avoiding adverse effects that are more prevalent in TPMT-deficient and heterozygous patients prescribed thiopurine medications.
99	DR	10921112	NA
99	DR	10798786	Azathioprine (AZA) is metabolized via the cytosolic enzyme thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT). TPMT activity exhibits genetic polymorphism with four prevalent (75%) mutant alleles TPMT*2 (G238C) and TPMT*3 (A719G and/or G460A) and a wild-type allele TPMT*1. To test the hypothesis that presence of these mutations is associated with greater toxicity of AZA in heart transplant recipients, 30 consecutive patients treated with AZA were followed up for the first month after heart transplant. Mutation of TPMT gene (mutation-specific polymerase chain reaction-based methods) was observed in four patients (A719G: n = 2; A719G plus G460: n = 2). Agranulocytosis did not occur in patients with the wild genotype. It occurred in the two patients with mutation A719G and there was a 40% drop in neutrophils in the two other patients. Discontinuation of AZA in the four mutant patients corrected for the drop. Presence of TPMT mutations is associated with a greater likelihood of agranulocytosis. Determination of these mutations could reduce the risk for hematological side-effects.
99	DR	10764140	Thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) catalyses the S-methylation of thiopurines, including 6-mercaptopurine and 6-thioguanine. TPMT activity exhibits genetic polymorphism, with about 1/300 inheriting TPMT deficiency as an autosomal recessive trait. If treated with standard doses of thiopurines, TPMTdeficient patients accumulate excessive thioguanine nucleotides in hematopoietic tissues, leading to severe hematological toxicity that can be fatal. However, TPMT-deficient patients can be successfully treated with a 10- to 15-fold lower dosage of these medications. The molecular basis for altered TPMT activity has been defined, with rapid and inexpensive assays available for the three signature mutations which account for the majority of mutant alleles. TPMT genotype correlates well with in vivo enzyme activity within erythrocytes and leukemic blast cells and is clearly associated with risk of toxicity. The impact of 6-mercaptopurine dose intensity is also being clarified as an important determinate of event-free survival in childhood leukemia. In addition, there are emerging data that TPMT genotype may influence the risk of secondary malignancies, including brain tumors and acute myelogenous leukemia. Ongoing studies aim to clarify the influence of TPMT on thiopurine efficacy, acute toxicity, and risk for delayed toxicity. Together, these advances hold the promise of improving the safety and efficacy of thiopurine therapy.
99	PR	10727309	The risk of azathioprine-induced myelosuppression can be predicted by detecting patients with intermediate or low thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) activity. Population studies have shown that 89% of whites have high TPMT activity, 11% have intermediate TPMT activity, and 0.3% have low TPMT activity. Three specific mutations in the TPMT gene that cause decreased TPMT activity have recently been identified. Patients homozygous for the TPMT mutations have low TPMT activity, and patients heterozygous for TPMT mutations have intermediate TPMT activity. This has led to the development of a technique for TPMT genotype analysis that will identify patients at risk of azathioprine-induced myelosuppression. We report a case of a patient with bullous pemphigoid who experienced azathioprine-induced myelosuppression and who was later found to be homozygous for TPMT mutant alleles. Using the cost of treatment required for this patient and the estimated population prevalence of TPMT mutations, we examined the cost impact of screening for TPMT mutations in all patients being considered for azathioprine therapy. We calculated that screening is cost-neutral assuming patients homozygous for TPMT mutations experience myelosuppression, and that it is cost-beneficial assuming patients heterozygous for TPMT mutations also experience myelosuppression while receiving azathioprine. Screening patients for TPMT mutations will reduce the risk of azathioprine-induced myelosuppression, and our study suggests that it may also be a cost-attractive strategy.
99	PR	10707497	Azathioprine, a cytostatic and immunosuppressive drug in use for some 30 years, can give rise to life-threatening neutropenia and thrombocytopenia. This may be caused by unexpectedly high concentrations of cytotoxic metabolites due to abnormally slow inactivation of 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP) by thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT) and/or xanthine oxidase. Low TPMT activity may be due to genetic polymorphism or interaction with drugs such as salicylic acid derivatives, while xanthine oxidase may be inhibited by allopurinol. High TPMT activity, on the other hand, may hamper cytostatic treatment. Safer and more effective treatment with azathioprine and its metabolite 6-MP becomes possible with new laboratory methods for pharmacotherapy monitoring.
99	NR	10671647	BACKGROUND: The clinical laboratory forms an essential bridge between fundamental discoveries in biological sciences and their transition into effective medical practice. The genetic basis for individuality in drug metabolism and response is the result of a finite number of inherited sequence variants (alleles) of genes encoding drug-metabolizing enzymes and drug receptors. Pharmacogenetics (PG) links differences in gene structure with pharmacological differences in pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. The next step in the process of applying PG (or pharmacogenomic) information to individualized therapeutic management is dissemination of this information to practicing physicians by clinical laboratorians. Transitioning PG analysis into clinical practice will require professionals in laboratory medicine to identify relevant polymorphisms, develop sensitive and specific testing strategies, and, in conjunction with physicians and pharmacologists, communicate interpretive guidelines regarding appropriate indications for testing and rational dose adjustment. We review these concepts and provide examples of how PG can be applied to support therapeutic decision making.
99	DR	10671643	Pharmacogenetics has emerged as a novel and challenging area of interest in oncology. Cancer chemotherapy is characterized by major intersubject variability in tumor responses and host toxicity. This variation may be caused by genetic differences in the enzymes involved in the metabolism of anticancer agents. Anticancer agents, such as 6-mercaptopurine, 5-fluorouracil, and irinotecan, have a narrow therapeutic index that can sometimes result in severe life-threatening toxicities. The impact of polymorphisms in metabolizing enzymes (thiopurine S-methyltransferase, dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase, and uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase) that participate significantly in the disposition of these anticancer agents is discussed.
99	DR	10628931	OBJECTIVE: Thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT) is a cytosolic enzyme that preferentially catalyzes the S-methylation of aromatic and heterocyclic sulfhydryl compounds, including Azathioprine (AZA). It has been reported that the level of AZA toxicity is dependent on the TPMT genotypes in Caucasian individuals; we thus investigated this relationship in Japanese. METHODS: The TPMT genotype was determined using peripheral blood cell DNA obtained from 36 Japanese patients with rheumatic diseases who were treated with AZA, by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique. Duration of AZA administration, white blood cell counts before and after AZA administration, and side effects were investigated in each subject, and were compared between the patients with or without TPMT mutation. RESULTS: The TPMT allelotype was TPMT*1/TPMT*1 in 33 (91.7%) and TPMT*1/TPMT*3C in 3 (8.3%) individuals. All 3 patients (100%) with the mutant TPMT allele (TPMT*3C) discontinued AZA treatment due to leucopenia while only 4 patients (12%) without mutant TPMT alleles showed leucopenia (p=0.0049, Fisher's exact test). However, leucopenia developed relatively late in patients with mutant TPMT. CONCLUSION: The TPMT mutant allele, TPMT*3C, also exists in Japanese individuals, and the bone marrow toxicity of AZA is likely stronger in patients with this mutant allele.
99	DR	10580024	BACKGROUND: Patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia are often treated with 6-mercaptopurine, and those with homozygous deficiency in thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT) enzyme activity have an extreme sensitivity to this drug as a result of the accumulation of higher cellular concentrations of thioguanine nucleotides. We studied the metabolism, dose requirements, and tolerance of 6-mercaptopurine among patients with different TPMT phenotypes. METHODS: We compared, by use of statistical modeling, 6-mercaptopurine pharmacology and tolerance in 180 patients who achieved remission on St. Jude Children's Research Hospital Protocol Total XII composed of weekly methotrexate (40 mg/m(2)) and daily oral 6-mercaptopurine (75 mg/m(2)) given for 2.5 years, interrupted every 6 weeks during the first year for treatment with either high-dose methotrexate or teniposide plus cytarabine. Statistical tests were two-sided. RESULTS: Erythrocyte concentrations of thioguanine nucleotides (pmol/8 x 10(8) erythrocytes) were inversely related to TPMT enzyme activity (P<.01), with averages (+/- standard deviations) of 417 (+/-179), 963 (+/-752), and 3565 (+/-1282) in TPMT homozygous wild-type (n = 161), heterozygous (n = 17), and homozygous-deficient (n = 2) patients, respectively. There was complete concordance between TPMT genotype and phenotype in a subset of 28 patients for whom TPMT genotype was determined. There were no sex differences in thioguanine nucleotide concentrations (P =.24), TPMT enzyme activity (P =.22), or average weekly prescribed dose of 6-mercaptopurine (P=.49). The cumulative incidence of 6-mercaptopurine dose reductions due to toxicity was highest among patients homozygous for mutant TPMT (100%), intermediate among heterozygous patients (35%), and lowest among wild-type patients (7%) (P<.001), with average (+/- standard deviation) final weekly 6-mercaptopurine doses of 72 (+/-60), 449 (+/-160), and 528 (+/-90) mg/m(2), respectively. Lowering doses of 6-mercaptopurine in TPMT heterozygotes and in deficient patients allowed administration of full protocol doses of other chemotherapy while maintaining high thioguanine nucleotide concentrations. CONCLUSION: We conclude that genetic polymorphism in TPMT is an important determinant of mercaptopurine toxicity, even among patients who are heterozygous for this trait.
99	NR	10491537	BACKGROUND: 6-Mercaptopurine (6MP) has been regarded as nonleukemogenic, even though the cytotoxicity of 6MP depends on the incorporation of 6-thioguanine nucleotides (6TGN) into DNA. In hematopoietic cells this pathway competes with S-methylation catalyzed by thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT). However, methylated 6MP metabolites inhibit purine de novo synthesis and thus may enhance incorporation of 6TGN into DNA. Approximately 10% of white individuals have low TPMT activity as a result of polymorphisms in the TPMT gene. The authors attempted to test the hypothesis that the degree of DNA damage during 6MP therapy might reflect variations in 6MP metabolism and pharmacokinetics. METHODS: The authors measured TPMT activity as well as erythrocyte levels of 6TGN (E-6TGN) and methylated 6MP metabolites (E-MeMP) during 6MP therapy in 439 children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia, 5 of whom later developed secondary myelodysplasia or acute myeloid leukemia (sMDS/AML). RESULTS: The patients who developed sMDS/AML had significantly lower TPMT activity compared with the remaining patients (P = 0.03). The 55 patients with TPMT activity <14 U/mL red blood cells (RBC) (antimode of the bimodal distribution) had a 5-year risk of sMDS/AML of 9 +/- 6% versus 1 +/- 1% for the remaining patients (P = 0.002). Cox regression analysis identified TPMT activity and E-MeMP level as the strongest predictors of risk for sMDS/AML (global P value = 0.02). Patients with low TPMT activity and high E-MeMP levels had the highest risk. All 5 patients with sMDS/AML had E-6TGN and/or E-MeMP levels > the 90% percentiles or had TPMT activity < 14 U/mL RBC. CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate an increased leukemogenic risk when 6MP is administered with other cytotoxic agents in patients with low TPMT activity, and indicate that not only high 6TGN levels but also high levels of methylated metabolites may lead to DNA damage.
99	DR	10461478	OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the presence of polymorphisms associated with reduced or absent activity of thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT), an enzyme involved in azathioprine metabolism, can predict side-effects, particularly myelosuppression, in patients taking this drug. METHODS: The TPMT genotype was determined in 120 patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) together with 15 patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and correlated with the effects of clinical exposure to azathioprine. RESULTS: TPMT polymorphisms were detected in eight patients. Severe marrow toxicity occurred in the single homozygote identified. Azathioprine was generally well tolerated, but 11 drug-associated neutropenias were detected. In only one of the 11 cases was a TPMT polymorphism identified. CONCLUSION: Homozygous TPMT deficiency was associated with severe marrow suppression. In the majority of cases, however, TPMT genotyping prior to azathioprine therapy would not have predicted myelosuppressive events and may augment, but not replace, regular blood monitoring.
99	DR	10376773	The thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) genetic polymorphism has been shown to have a highly significant clinical impact, namely in the therapeutic efficiency of thiopurine drugs used in the treatment of a wide range of diseases. Available diagnostic methods, although reproducible and sensitive, are relatively laborious. Thus population studies are still very scarce. In this work we describe a new polymerase chain reaction-single strand confirmational analysis based protocol for TPMT specific detection which introduces a substantial technical simplification avoiding the use of restriction enzyme treatment after polymerase chain reaction amplification. Additionally, the use of this protocol allows the simultaneous detection of a T474 to C substitution, a frequent silent mutation in the North Portuguese population (TPMT*1S = 0.215). In a sample of 310 unrelated Northern Portuguese individuals, 15 were found to be heterozygous for the TPMT*3A allele (defined by the presence of two transitions, G460 to A and A719 to G) which is associated with TPMT enzymatic deficiency; the corresponding gene frequency estimate was 0.024. We also attempted to evaluate the relationship between the molecular TPMT genotype and the reaction to treatments involving thiopurine drugs by analysing a sample of 24 children submitted to curative therapy of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Four of them were shown to be heterozygous for the TPMT*3A allele. An examination of their clinical histories showed that all four patients exhibited signs of severe hepatic toxicity during treatment.
99	DR	10354134	The role of 6-mercaptopurine (6MP) in the treatment of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) is well established. However, the efficacy of 6MP is significantly influenced by inactivation by the polymorphic enzyme thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT). In the general population 89-94% have high TPMT activity, 6-11% have intermediate activity, and approximately 0.3% have low activity. Individuals with low-activity experience severe or fatal toxicity with standard 6MP doses. Prospective identification of this group of patients might prevent this problem. Recent identification of the molecular basis for low TPMT activity enabled rapid assessment of altered 6MP metabolism by PCR methods. This study evaluated the frequency of mutant TPMT alleles in 147 children with ALL. One patient was homozygous mutant (0.7%), and 16 patients were heterozygous for variant TPMT alleles (10.9%). The majority of mutant alleles were TPMT*3A. Both the allele frequency and the pattern of TPMT mutations were similar to that observed in an adult British population. The number of weeks when 6MP therapy was administered at full dose was determined in patients on MRC UKALL X and XI. The 94 patients spent a median 11% of the maintenance period receiving no therapy as a result of haematological toxicity. There was no significant difference in the number of weeks when no therapy could be administered among patients with a wild-type or heterozygous genotype. However, the one patient with a homozygous mutant genotype had severe haematological toxicity and no therapy could be administered for 53% of the maintenance period. This study demonstrates that 11.6% of the children had variant TPMT alleles. Prospective identification of TPMT genotype may be a promising tool for decreasing excessive haematological toxicity in individuals with low activity.
99	PR	10331075	Methyl conjugation is an important pathway in the biotransformation of many exogenous and endogenous compounds. Pharmacogenetic studies of methyltransferase enzymes have resulted in the identification and characterization of functionally important common genetic polymorphisms for catechol O-methyltransferase, thiopurine methyltransferase, and histamine N-methyltransferase. In recent years, characterization of these genetic polymorphisms has been extended to include the cloning of cDNAs and genes, as well as a determination of the molecular basis for the effects of inheritance on these methyltransferase enzymes. The thiopurine methyltransferase genetic polymorphism is responsible for clinically significant individual variations in the toxicity and therapeutic efficacy of thiopurine drugs such as 6-mercaptopurine. Phenotyping for the thiopurine methyltransferase genetic polymorphism represents one of the first examples in which testing for a pharmacogenetic variant has entered standard clinical practice. The full functional implications of pharmacogenetic variation in the activities of catechol O-methyltransferase and histamine N-methyltransferase remain to be determined. Finally, experimental strategies used to study methylation pharmacogenetics illustrate the rapid evolution of biochemical, pharmacologic, molecular, and genomic approaches that have been used to determine the role of inheritance in variation in drug metabolism, effect, and toxicity.
99	DR	10213363	Genetic polymorphism of drug metabolizing enzymes can be the major determinant of inter-individual differences in drug disposition and effects. In this mini-review, the evolution of pharmacogenetic studies, from the recognition of phenotypic polymorphisms to the discovery of genetic mutations responsible for these inherited traits, is illustrated by the genetic polymorphism of thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT). TPMT, which exhibits autosomal co-dominant polymorphism, plays an important role in metabolism of the antileukemic and immunosuppressive medications, mercaptopurine, thioguanine, and azathioprine. The genetic polymorphism of TPMT activity in humans was first reported in 1980, and in the last five years the genetic basis for this polymorphism has been elucidated. Isolation and cloning of mutant alleles from humans with TPMT deficiency has identified the major mutant alleles, established the basis for loss of TPMT activity and permitted development of PCR-based genotyping assays to make a molecular diagnosis of TPMT-deficiency and heterozygosity. These studies illustrate the potential clinical benefits of elucidating the molecular basis of inherited differences in drug metabolism and disposition, and future automation of molecular diagnostics will make it feasible to more precisely select the optimal drug and dosage for individual patients.
99	PR	10208641	Thiopurine methyltransferase metabolizes 6-mercaptopurine, thioguanine and azathioprine, thereby regulating cytotoxicity and clinical response to these thiopurine drugs. In healthy Caucasian populations, 89-94% of individuals have high thiopurine methyltransferase activity, 6-11% intermediate and 0.3% low, resulting from genetic polymorphism. Four variant thiopurine methyltransferase alleles were detected in over 80% of individuals with low or intermediate thiopurine methyltransferase activity. The wild-type allele is defined as TPMT*1 and the mutant alleles are TPMT*2 (G238C), TPMT*3A (G460A and A719G), TPMT*3B (G460A) and TPMT*3B (A719G). The frequency of these alleles in different ethnic groups is not well defined. In this study, DNA from 199 British Caucasian, 99 British South West Asian and 192 Chinese individuals was analysed for the presence of these variant alleles using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism and allele-specific polymerase chain reaction based assays. The frequency of individuals with a variant thiopurine methyltransferase genotype was: Caucasians 10.1% (20/199), South West Asians 2.0% (2/99) and Chinese 4.7% (9/192). Two TPMT*2 heterozygotes were identified in the Caucasian population, but this allele was not found in the two Asian populations. TPMT*3A was the only mutant allele found in the South West Asians (two heterozygotes). This was also the most common mutant allele in the Caucasians (16 heterozygotes and one homozygote) but was not found in the Chinese. All mutant alleles identified in the Chinese population were TPMT*3C (nine heterozygotes). This allele was found at a low frequency in the Caucasians (one heterozygote). This suggests that A719G is the oldest mutation, with G460A being acquired later to form the TPMT*3A allele in the Caucasian and South West Asian populations. TPMT*2 appears to be a more recent allele, which has only been detected in Caucasians to date. These ethnic differences may be important in the clinical use of thiopurine drugs.
99	DR	9893619	Cancer chemotherapy is limited by significant inter-individual variations in responses and toxicities. Such variations are often due to genetic alterations in drug metabolising enzymes (pharmacokinetic polymorphisms) or receptor expression (pharmacodynamic polymorphisms). Pharmacogenetic screening prior to anticancer drug administration may lead to identification of specific populations predisposed to drug toxicity or poor drug responses. The role of polymorphisms in specific enzymes, such as thiopurine S-methyltransferases (TPMT), dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD), aldehyde dehydrogenases (ALDH), glutathione S-transferases (GST), uridine diphosphate glucuronosyl-transferases (UGTs) and cytochrome P450 (CYP 450) enzymes in cancer therapy are discussed in this review.
99	PR	9763570	The level of expression of the enzyme thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) is an important determinant of the metabolism of thiopurines used in the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Studies in red blood cells (RBC) have shown that TPMT expression displays genetic polymorphism with 11% of individuals having intermediate and one in 300 undetectable levels. The genetic basis for this polymorphism has now been elucidated and polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based assays described for the most common mutations accounting for reduced activity. In previous studies, genotype has been correlated with red blood cell activity. In this report, we describe the relationship between genotype and TPMT activity measured directly in the target of drug action, the leukemic cell. We have demonstrated that the TPMT activity in lymphoblasts from 38 children and adults found by PCR to be homozygotes (*1/*1) was significantly higher than that in the five heterozygotes (*1/*3) detected (median, 0.25 v 0.08, P < .002, Mann-Whitney U). Similar results were obtained when results from children were analyzed separately. However, comparison of activity in blasts from AML and ALL showed a higher level in the former (0.35 v 0.22 nU/mg, P < .002, n = 17, 35), suggesting that factors other than genotype may also influence expression.
99	PR	9634537	NA
99	PR	9598153	NA
99	PR	9549339	This brief review discusses the relationship between genetic polymorphism of drug metabolizing enzyme and drug's safety and efficacy. When elimination occurs via a single metabolic pathway, individual differences in metabolic rates can lead to large differences in drug and metabolite concentrations in the blood. Genetic polymorphism leads to subpopulation of patients with decreased, absent or even increased activities of certain reactions (e.g., CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2C9, N-acetyltransferase, thiopurine methyltransferase polymorphism). The consequences of a genetic polymorphism include not only altered kinetics of specific drug substrate but idiosyncratic adverse drug reactions. Having these information will aid in determining dosage of certain medications to the patients with an inherited abnormality of drug metabolizing enzyme. Pharmacogenetics already has influenced therapeutics.
99	PR	9114722	NA
99	NR	8857546	The formation of intracellular thionucleotides are a prerequisite for mercaptopurine (MP) cytotoxicity, and interindividual variations in the inherited level of thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) activity regulate their formation. Measurement of pretreatment TPMT activities can identify the TPMT "deficient" patient and, conversely, the individual with very high enzyme activities. The former are at higher risk of acute toxicity and potentially fatal bone marrow failure and the latter of suboptimal treatment. Leukaemic children taking MP therapy who form inadequate amounts of thioguanine nucleotides (TGNs) do not experience drug toxicity and are at an increased risk of disease relapse. When low TGNs are due to very high TPMT activities, thioguanine may be a more appropriate thiopurine. Another cause of inadequate TGN concentrations is partial or noncompliance with oral chemotherapy. Compliance problems can be identified by the measurement of both TGNs and methylated drug metabolites.
99	NR	8861653	Thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) is an important enzyme in the metabolism of 6-mercaptopurine (6MP), which is used in the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). TPMT catalyzes the formation of methylthioinosine monophosphate (MetIMP), which is cytotoxic for cultured cell lines, and it plays a role in detoxification of 6MP. Population studies show a genetic polymorphism for TPMT with both high and low activity alleles. About 1 of 300 subjects is homozygous for the low activity. The function TPMT plays in detoxification or therapeutic efficacy of 6MP in vivo is not clear. In this article the genetic polymorphism of TPMT is reviewed and the contribution of TPMT to the cytotoxic action, or detoxification, of 6MP in children with ALL is discussed. Induction of TPMT activity has been described during the treatment for ALL. We performed a pilot study on the influence of high-dose 6MP infusions (1300 mg/m2 in 24 h) on TPMT activity of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (pMNC) of eleven patients with ALL. The TPMT activities were in, or, above the normal range. There was no statistically significant difference between the TPMT activities before and after the 6MP infusions. MetIMP levels in pMNC increased during successive courses. This might be explained by TPMT induction, but other explanations are plausible as well. Twenty five percent of the TPMT assays failed, because less than the necessary 5.10(6) pMNC could be isolated from the blood of leukopenic patients. Red blood cells can not be used for TPMT measurements, since transfusions are frequently required during the treatment with 6MP infusions. Therefore, the influence of high-dose 6MP infusions on TPMT activity can only be investigated further when a TPMT assay which requires less pMNC has been developed.
99	NR	7703493	The activity of thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) exhibits genetic polymorphism, with approximately 1 in 300 individuals inheriting TPMT deficiency as an autosomal recessive trait, and about 11% having intermediate activity (ie, heterozygotes). Patients with TPMT deficiency accumulate excessive concentrations of 6-thioguanine nucleotides (TGNs) and develop severe toxicity when treated with standard dosages of mercaptopurine. High TPMT activity has been associated with lower concentrations of TGNs, yielding a higher risk of treatment failure in children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). As the biochemical basis of these pharmacodynamic relationships has not been fully elucidated, we investigated the variability and relationship of TPMT activity in erythrocytes and lymphoblasts from children with ALL. A 58-fold range of erythrocyte TPMT activity was found among 119 patients receiving ALL chemotherapy (0.6 to 34.9 U/mL packed erythrocytes), but relatively low intrapatient variability (coefficient of variation, 13.5%) was observed over 1 year. A 27-fold range in TPMT activity was observed in leukemic blasts obtained from 42 patients at initial diagnosis (3.3 to 88.9 U/1 x 10(9) cells). TPMT activity in leukemic blasts at diagnosis was significantly correlated with TPMT in erythrocytes before therapy (rs = .75, P < .0001, N = 13). These data document extensive interpatient variability of TPMT activity in ALL blasts and establish its linkage to polymorphic TPMT activity in erythrocytes, providing a new mechanism by which erythrocytes serve as prognostic markers of mercaptopurine metabolism and TPMT activity in children with ALL.
99	NR	7628307	Thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) is a genetically polymorphic enzyme that catalyzes the S-methylation of thiopurine drugs such as 6-mercaptopurine. This genetic polymorphism is an important factor responsible for individual variation in thiopurine drug response. A cDNA for TPMT has been cloned from T84 human colon carcinoma cells. Northern blot analysis of multiple human tissues was performed with the T84 human colon carcinoma TPMT cDNA open reading frame (ORF) as a probe as one step toward understanding the molecular basis for the TPMT genetic polymorphism. Three mRNA species (approximately 1.4, 2.0, and 3.6 kb in length) were present in all tissues studied, including liver. However, none of these mRNAs matched the length of the 2.7 kb T84 TPMT cDNA. Therefore, it was important to clone a TPMT cDNA from a human drug-metabolizing organ such as the liver to determine whether its sequence matched that of the cDNA cloned from the T84 cell line. A human liver cDNA library was screened with the T84 TPMT cDNA ORF as a probe, and a 1.8 kb cDNA was isolated with a coding region sequence identical to that of the T84 TPMT cDNA. The TPMT cDNA ORF was then used to screen a human lymphocytes genomic DNA library in an attempt to clone the TPMT gene(s) in humans. Three intronless clones were isolated with identical ORF sequences that were 96% identical to that of the TPMT cDNA, but which contained multiple nucleotide substitutions and one deletion. The 3'- and 5'-flanking regions of one of the genomic DNA clones were sequenced.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
99	DR	7862671	Thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT; S-adenosyl-L-methionine:thiopurine S-methyltransferase, EC 2.1.1.67) activity exhibits genetic polymorphism, with approximately 0.33% of Caucasians and African-Americans inheriting TPMT deficiency as an autosomal recessive trait. To determine the molecular genetic basis for this polymorphism, we cloned the TPMT cDNA from a TPMT-deficient patient who had developed severe hematopoietic toxicity during mercaptopurine therapy. Northern blot analysis of RNA isolated from leukocytes of the deficient patient demonstrated the presence of TPMT mRNAs of comparable size to that in subjects with high TPMT activity. Sequencing of the mutant TPMT cDNA revealed a single point mutation (G238-->C), leading to an amino acid substitution at codon 80 (Ala80-->Pro). When assessed in a yeast heterologous expression system, this mutation led to a 100-fold reduction in TPMT catalytic activity relative to the wild-type cDNA, despite a comparable level of mRNA expression. A mutation-specific PCR amplification method was developed and used to detect the G238-->C mutation in genomic DNA of the propositus and her mother. This inactivating mutation in the human TPMT gene provides insights into the genetic basis for this inherited polymorphism in drug metabolism.
99	DR	7857117	BACKGROUND: Thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) is one of three major enzymes involved in the metabolism of azathioprine and its active metabolite 6-mercaptopurine. Thiopurine methyltransferase activity is determined by an allelic polymorphism for either high (TPMTH) or low (TPMTL) enzyme activity. Homozygotes for the low activity allele are known to be at risk for profound myelosuppression with azathioprine. Heterozygotes may be at risk for myelosuppression. Homozygotes for the high activity allele may be inadequately immunosuppressed with conventional, empiric doses of azathioprine. We analyzed TPMT activity in red blood cell (RBC) lysates and determined the TPMT genotypes (based on normal population screening) of 28 dermatologic patients. This information was correlated with the observed efficacy and side effects of azathioprine therapy. OBSERVATIONS: Two patients with TPMT levels of less than 12.5 U/mL RBCs (both TPMTH heterozygotes) experienced leukopenia (white blood count < 4.0 x 10(9)/L) with azathioprine doses around 1.5 mg/kg. A third patient who experienced leukopenia had a TPMT level at the lower end of the homozygous range (15.5 U/mL RBCs) but received the highest dose of azathioprine (2.6 mg/kg) of all patients in this series. Ten patients with TPMT levels of more than 18.5 U/mL RBCs (all TPMTH homozygotes) receiving less than 1.5 mg/kg of azathioprine were judged to have a poor clinical response. In comparison, seven patients with TPMT levels between 12.5 and 18.5 U/mL RBCs (six TPMTH homozygotes and one TPMTH heterozygote) receiving 0.9 to 1.8 mg/kg of azathioprine had a favorable clinical response. Adverse effects of gastrointestinal upset and liver function test abnormalities did not appear to correlate with TPMT activity. CONCLUSION: The TPMTH heterozygotes may be at increased risk for myelosuppression with standard, empiric doses of azathioprine. On the other hand, homozygotes for TPMTH, particularly those with TPMT levels at the upper end of the homozygous range, may have a poor clinical response to azathioprine due to inadequate empiric dosing.
99	PR	7822499	NA
